God, in all his love, revealed himself to us through divine revelation. He created the world and us through the Word, His son,
and has since kept everything in existence, being the source of existence itself. He spoke through the prophets, making His will
known to us through their tongues and through His own son. Obedience must be given to God, so that by our free compliance with
His will we may better serve and understand Him. Although the religious truths of God and His ways can be discovered and
understood by reason, God chose to reveal himself to us through divine revelation so that every man may know with certainty His
truths. God has seen to it that many of those truths be preserved over time by the traditions of the faithful gone before us. He
has also provided us with sacred scripture so that we might never lose sight of those truths. And, through Apostolic succession,
He has provided for us a means of interpreting those traditions and writings. That is, the clergy of the Church, in accord with
the Holy Spirit, have the ability to interpret divine revelation correctly, so that the meanings of these traditions and writings
are not lost over time. In section two, it says; "He may invite and take them into fellowship with Himself." This is at once
uplifting and surprising, for while this is clearly something to be desired, one cannot help but be surprised at the prospect of
fellowship with God. How could we possibly be good companions of God? I think the answer lies in His love for us. For although a
king might have nothing in common with a peasant, if he truly loves that peasant as one of his people, he might find joy in the
peasant's company as if he were an old friend. In section three, it says that God "creates all things and keeps them in
existence." This reminds me of Metaphysics, the study of being, for it is God who is the source of all being, who has so much
love for His creations that He generously offers them existence itself.

From the beginning, Christians have been defending themselves and their religion from intellectual attacks. At first, they only
had to explain themselves to the Jews. As their religion spread, however, the amount of attacks grew as well, and they came from
all around. On top of that, the early Christians were not in the position to make things up as they went, they needed to explain
what had already happened with clarity. The earliest writings about the Christian faith were written by Christians, and for
Christians, and they more or less acted as sermons for the newly converted. It was not until the early second century that
Christian writers began writing apologies, as they are known, in defense of the faith and intended for non Christian readers. The
most sophisticated of the earlier apologists was Justin Martyr, a Palestinian trained in Greek philosophy. He wrote several
apologetic works to the Romans, and even wrote to the Jews. It was in this work that Justin described his conversion to
Christianity, in which he described how an old man told him the truth about the ancient prophets, which kindled a fire in his
soul, so that he desired to learn more. One aspect of the writing that I found interesting was in Justin's description of his own
conversion. He said that the old man described prophets as more ancient and wiser than philosophers in that instead of deriving a
small amount of truth themselves, they were shown a great amount of the truth, and became messengers and witnesses to that truth.

Origen was one of the earliest Christian writers to take up the task of defending the faith. He came shortly after Celsus, and
decided to take upon himself the task of showing where Celsus went wrong. He did this in his book Against Celsus, in which he
argues that Christian theology and the Gospel must be judged not according to Greek philosophy, but according to a "proof proper
to itself." This was keeping in line with what Christians before him thought, including Justin Martyr, who said "Reason became
man and was called Jesus Christ." There was still the problem, however, of dealing with the Jews. The problem here was that they
considered themselves "elect," as if their previous standing as the chosen people of God meant that they were above Christianity.
But Christ came to make the whole world his chosen people, not to remove that status from the Jews, and that is where they went
wrong.
One topic that I found particularly interesting is the part about grace. Origen and other early Christian thinkers were aware
that people are not capable of turning towards God on their own. A vast amount of grace is necessary for anyone to turn towards
God, and that grace is given freely by God.

Since the Christian faith began, a persistent attack has been that Christianity ignores reason for the sake of faith. This could
not be farther from the truth. Origen's defense of he faith against Celsus had been a blazing example of how reasonable the faith
was, and many other Christian works besides had shown that Christianity does not rely solely on faith. Nevertheless, in the 18th
century, a group of French philosophes believed that it was time for reason to break free from the chains of faith. Although
Christianity is a religion of reason, faith has always been of great importance, so even though reason is not missing, if one is
to believe, faith is required. Augustine, after leaving the proud and haughty Manichees, sought the truth that he was unable to
find from them. He eventually found it in the Catholic Church, and when he did, he wrote extensively on the reasonableness of
faith.
I find it unconvincing that Origen showed the reasonableness of the faith well in his Contra Celsus. According to Wilken, he used
scripture extensively in that book to prove or show many of his points. This is great for faith, but I think solely philosophical
or logical arguments would have been more effective at contradicting the works of critics.

Christian thought is bound to those who have gone before us in a way that is unique to the faith. There is sacred tradition, the
apostolic succession, and the communion of saints, and all of these are vastly important to the faith. This reliance on the past
can be called a reliance on authority, and that is not what many might believe it to be. Augustine did not think of authority as
power or allegiance to it a sort of blind obedience, rather he knew that it is authority that allows us to believe and see with
reason, as long as one has faith. The knowledge of God does not come directly, but rather through others, which is why the word
"martyr" is so important in the Cristian faith, because "martyr" means witness. Moreover, to Christians, witness does not mean
simply "reporter," it has a much deeper meaning involving the witness of Christ, of His works, and a personal witness as well.
One aspect that I found interesting was Origen's understanding of the doubting Thomas passage from the gospels. I am inclined to
disagree with him on this point, for what does not make sense about the the phrase "blessed are those who have not seen and yet
have come to believe?" In any case, it may be that I am missing the point here.

God created the world. God created the world, and he loves us and his other creations. This is the essence of what is said in
Genesis concerning creation. But recently, because of huge advances in the realm of science, the creation story of Genesis has
been under attack. How can one accept the seemingly flawed story of creation in Genesis when everything we are learning from
God's own creation seems to be contradicting it? The answer is that it is the form, not the content that is important. One must
recall that in the time when Genesis was written, the world was different, and many of the people of the time believed that great
warring forces of good and evil had created the world. The knowledge that God created the world and that He was looking out for
everyone, was vastly important to the Israelites then, but only because it came in language they could understand.
I find it interesting that there is such a strong connection between the Manichees in Augustine's Confession and what Pope
Benedict is saying here. On page 17, he says, "The new historical thinking wanted to read every text in itself, in its bare
literalness" Which is almost exactly the same as the description of the Manichees that Wilken gave in his book.

And God created the creatures of the sea and the birds of the sky, and God saw that they were good, blessed them. Then God made
the creatures of the land, the animals and plants, and again he saw that they were good and so he blessed them. And finally he
created man, he made them male and female, and in his image. This finish to the creation story is full of meaning, if not
scientific meaning. However, in the of the scientific revolution in the 18th and 19th centuries, a growing awareness of the
immutability of the universe developed, and as a result, the creation narrative became more and more an offense to science, which
had brought the human race out of ignorance. This, however, is not the case, especially considering that science itself has
changed so much since then that we now know of no better explanation for the cause of the universe than that it simply came to be
from nothingness, in an instant. And this is where the meaning of the creation story is important, because it explains in depth
the love that caused the world to be made in the first place.
There have always been, and will always be people who deny the faith, and especially the creation story because it is
"un scientific." This view could not be farther from the truth. The method of science in general is to examine evidence and come
to reasonable conclusions based on it. Apply this method to the faith and suddenly you have mounds of evidence that simply cannot
be ignored. However, when it comes to examining that evidence, many scientists would rather throw it away, discard it with
disdain, than take it at it's face value. For if they did take it at it's face value, how could they respond other than by
converting? For what can you do with evidence such as the Shroud of Turin other than ignore it or believe?

In those days, there were no plants or vegetation on the Earth, and no man to till the ground. So God made a mist spring up from
the heavens, which watered the Earth. He then made man from the dust of the Earth, and breathed life into his nostrils. The
question of what is the human being has been persistent, for everyone from every time asks the question at one time or another.
This passage answers that question in a way, because it says that we came ultimately from God, and we have His spirit in us.
However, in this age of technology and information, explanations such as these do not suffice. That is because people of this age
have become accustomed to having hard mathematical proof for nearly everything at their fingertips, and anything that is not the
result of rigorous scientific study is not good enough. However, it has been the opinion of many philosophers and scientists over
time that it is practical reasoning, not theoretical reasoning, that is more important.
Jacques Monod, an accomplished scientist, wrote about this argument:
"Because nature is conservative, these mistakes, once having come into existence, are carried on. Such mistakes can add up, and
from the adding up of mistakes something new can arise. Now an astonishing conclusion follows: It was in this way that the whole
world of living creatures, and human beings themselves, came into existence. We are the product of haphazard mistakes." This
argument is fundamentally flawed for many reasons. One of them is is that evolution is not simply chance. It is not caused by
mistakes. The design of reproduction, the way that chromosomes get twisted up before reproduction, makes it clear that that these
"mistakes" are the goal of reproduction, and "intended." If an action is intended, can it be a mistake?

The serpent (Satan) was witty and subtle, and he attempted to convince Adam and Eve to disobey God. He told them the eating the
fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil would make them like God. The woman was convinced, and decided to eat the
fruit. She then shared it with her husband, and they ate. This resulted in the banning of mankind from the Garden of Eden. There
is a sentiment among some bishops that in evangelizing, Christians have not been entirely true to the words of Jesus, because
they do not speak of repentance. Sin has largely become a topic not often spoken of, not just in evangelization, but in the
general public, both Christian and secular. This is a problem is the logical result of secularism, but as Christians we should in
general be much more open with sinfulness in general, and especially the repentance necessary to enter the Kingdom of Heaven.
I think that the problem of evangelizing and converting non Christians is is interesting, and to be done successfully it
certainly requires tact and delicacy. This often results in a halving of the message, and an avoidance of the necessity of
repentance. The question is, does this do more good than harm? On one hand, it is likely that it results in more converts to
Christianity. On the other hand, those converts and as a result Christianity in general become more soft and not likely to talk
about sin as much as they should. Whether the result is ultimately good or bad is still up for question, I think.

The theological significance of creation, not only of the creation narrative in the Bible but of the fundamental and
unquestionable aspects of creation, namely that God created the world and and us, and ultimately we belong to him. These aspects
of creation are central to St. Thomas of Aquino's work in the Summa Theologica, which is one of the most important works in the
history of the Church, and indeed are central to Christian theology in general. The problem in recent times has been reconciling
the creation's implied 'limit' of what humans should do with science and the race to do all that humans can do, driven onward by
science and discovery. And again we come to that deist approach, the one that tries to reconcile these seemingly opposed stances
by suggesting that perhaps creation did indeed happen, but God has since stepped back and not messed with it. This, however,
denies the necessary power of God as the source of all being. For as long as God is the source of all being, he cannot simply
step back and watch, he needs to be actively holding the world, and therefore us, in his hands.

Noah, the second great patriarch of Israel, had his trials as well. In his time, he was the only righteous person in the world.
As a result, he was the one who God chose to save from the great flood. Along with Noah, God saved all the animals as well, so
the Earth might not be without them. Later in the history of Israel, it was Abram, and later Abraham, who was the next great
patriarch. Abraham, however, is more important to the history of Israel, as he was the one who was the actual ancestor of the
Hebrews. Abraham had a much more chaotic life than Noah, from the beginning an outcast among the other people of his time. But
God favored him, and he fathered many sons, including Isaac, who was bound to be the next father of Israel. Isaac in turn had two
sons, Esau and Jacob, who again continued the line of Israel.
The flood story is very interesting to me, especially since it was corroborated by the other ancient peoples of the time. This
seems to be evidence for an actual flood happening, and in turn raises the questions of how it came about scientifically (not
why, of course, because God would answer that question).

Jacob was the younger son of Isaac, but he was favored by God and Rebekah. He was more ambitious than Esau, and so desired his
brother's advantages. So he fooled his father with an elaborate plan, and was given his father's blessing as the first born.
Rebekah then fooled Isaac again, this time to save Jacob's life. So Isaac sent Jacob to another land for a wife, and Esau never
had the chance to kill him. After 7 years of work for Laban, Jacob was fooled into marrying Leah instead of Rachel (what goes
around comes around) and had to work for Laban for another 7 years for marrying Rachel as well. Later, Jacob had many sons, but
his favored son was Joseph, for he was born of Rachel, who Jacob loved more than Leah. But Joseph's brothers begrudged him
because of his favor with their father, and tried to kill him. This, however, resulted in Joseph being taken to Egypt as a slave.
He was favored by God and did well there, and eventually became the second most powerful man in Egypt.
Jacob's story is interesting to me because he did things that seem unjust and yet God still favored him. He tricked his brother
to get his birthright, and he fooled his father into giving him his older brother's blessing. Or maybe Jacob deserved (and
needed) these things more because of his destiny to be more involved with the future of Israel.

In the time after Joseph's life, the Hebrews in Egypt multiplied and grew so that they outnumbered the Egyptians. The Pharaoh,
however, was not pleased with this. So he subjected the Hebrews to slavery and oppression, and eventually ordered the murder of
all male Hebrew children. It was in this dire situation that Moses was taken by the Pharaoh's daughter, and grew up as her son.
Eventually though, Moses discovered his real people, and was exiled from the land after killing an Egyptian to save a Hebrew. In
Midian, Moses married the daughter of the priest there, and settled down to live his life. God, however had other plans, for
eventually he called on Moses to deliver the Hebrews. Moses, after some debate, did as he was told, and went to Egypt to lead his
people to freedom. After much back and forth between Moses and the Pharaoh and 10 plagues to boot, the Hebrews were finally
allowed to leave. Once again the Pharaoh changed his mind, and chased them with his armies. God, however, did not let the Hebrews
down. He split the Red Sea through Moses for them, and drowned the Egyptians in it, as a final punishment Pharaoh's misdeeds.
Moses, although by far the most important of the patriarchs and perhaps the best overall, was not allowed to enter Canan. He
received this punishment as a result of a rather minor transgression at Meribah: he struck the rock twice instead of speaking to
it to get the water. It has always intrigued me that such a minor fault could result in such a great punishment, but perhaps for
someone such as Moses this kind of sin is far worse than for someone who is not as holy.

When Samuel had grown old, he appointed his sons as judges in Israel, since he was too old to do his duty. But the people cried
out, because Samuel's sons were not just, and ruled badly. They called for a king, but Samuel warned them and gave them a
message, telling them that they would not like a king. However, they continued complaining until Samuel relented, and God
appointed a king. When Saul had lost favor with the lord, God send Samuel to find a new king among the sons of Jesse. When young
David was presented to Samuel, the Lord told him that this was the one whom he had chosen. Later, when Saul was bothered by an
evil spirit, David was sent for, because of his skill as a harpist. David's musical talent was such that Saul favored him, and
made David his arms bearer. Later, when war broke out between the Philistines and Israel, David again came in handy, when he
demonstrated his great faith in the Lord by fighting Goliath without armor or a sword. David won, and that was the beginning of
David's great military endeavors. With David's victories, however, came Saul's jealousy, and eventually hatred.
Moses may have been Israel's greatest patriarch, but David was certainly Israel's greatest king. He was incredibly gifted, and
always followed the Lord's will, with only one exception. It is interesting, however, that he lied sometimes, and nobody seemed
to care. I know that lying is always unacceptable, so why would it be okay for David?

A fool tells himself that God does not exist in order to relieve the guilt of his soul. He would not fear the Lord for destroying
his people. Whoever does what is good and lives righteously will see God in heaven. My God, why have you forsaken me? My fathers
trusted in you, but you have abandoned me. I am surrounded by my enemies, but stay by my side. I will proclaim you to the people
and the poor will be satisfied, and for many years to come the world will remember and turn to the Lord. The Lord is my shepherd,
he will protect me and lead me. He gives me food and drink in spite of my enemies, and I will be with him forever. Lord have
mercy on me, for I am guilty. Cleanse my soul and help me to never sin again. Lord, purify me and forget all my sins.
Wow, Psalm 14 is very relevant today, perhaps more so than it was when it was first written. Psalm 22 resembles Jesus' story so
much that it seems like it was written with Jesus in mind, or at least with a lot of guidance from the Holy Spirit.

Israel knows not their master, the Lord. Israel has become evil, their ways are corrupted by sin. The land has become like Sodom
and Gomorrah, it is only the Lord's mercy that has left it habitable. God tires of your offerings that attempt to cover up your
sins. But there is still hope, there is still a chance for you to make right. Israel has become sick with sin, so the Lord will
cure the land of it's evil. Their land is full of wealth, horses, and the idols they have made for themselves. But the proud
shall be brought low, they will be humbled by the Lord.
Isaiah says that God is disgusted with Israel's sacrifices and offerings and festivals. This is not because God has randomly
decided not to like such things, but because  they are done not out of piety but out of a pagan desire to "please the gods." In
other words, these formalities are done to cover up the festering sins of the people. But God would rather have no festivals and
righteous people than sacrifices and offerings and unjust people.

Global warming is now at the forefront of many government policies, while energy scarcity has been considered less than
important. Together, however, these two political issues affect a substantial portion of humanity’s future happiness and
thriving. One area in particular is intimately interconnected with these two issues, and that area is the market of electricity
generation. Because electricity generation is such a broad market, and is the foundation for so much market activity, any
problems faced here in particular are felt in almost every other area of the economy, which is a key component of humanity’s
future flourishing. This connection and dependence on electricity by the rest of the free market system creates the potential
danger of problems in the energy sector causing far more problems in many other sectors. Because of this potential danger, energy
has become a priority for many nations. Every nation deals with energy generation differently, some with more or less of
different kinds of fuel, with many different mixes of fossil fuels, conventional renewables, nuclear power, and others.
A good example of the differences in electricity generation is the contrast between France and Germany. The two diverged many
years ago and have since become polar opposites in their policies on electricity generation. France’s path is one of growth and
independence that began in the mid 1970’s with a full commitment to nuclear power. The goal was making the whole country nuclear
powered as soon as possible in order to be completely energy independent. They worked hard, and despite public opposition to
nuclear power due to various accidents they stayed committed to nuclear power. The result is evident today, as France is now
about 70% nuclear powered (“Electricity Statistics”). Another result of nuclear powered France is that it is the biggest exporter
of electricity in the world.
Germany, on the other hand, has struggled with its electricity supply for decades, now committing to nuclear power, now
committing to avoid it. Every time a major disaster occurred, Germany reversed its commitment to nuclear power, and that is where
the country stands today, with a pledge to close all nuclear plants by 2020. This anti nuclear commitment has continued since the
2011 nuclear disaster in Fukushima, and has resulted in a constant struggle to replace the lost nuclear power with a clean
alternative, and has not yet succeeded.
Global Warming
The first of the two global problems this thesis deals with is the phenomenon of increasing temperatures known as global warming.
Global warming, although the phenomenon is much more well known today than in the past, is not a new discovery. In the 1800’s,
Svante Arrhenius calculated by hand the effects of atmospheric carbon on world temperatures. Although Arrhenius spent years on
his work, his findings and global warming in general were largely ignored for much of the 19th and 20th centuries. In modern
times, it is generally understood that global warming is happening and that it has numerous negative effects. It is also
understood that in order to decrease many of the negative effects of global warming, serious cuts of carbon emissions must occur
soon.
The mechanics behind greenhouse gases trapping heat in the atmosphere are well understood and uncontested. The first experiments
showing the greenhouse gas effect were done in the mid 1800’s by John Tindall, who discovered that greenhouse gases, such as
carbon, trap the sun’s heat in the atmosphere. Tyndall’s findings were then taken up by Arrhenius, who used data from Tyndall’s
experiments to calculate the effect of CO₂ on the world’s temperature. Over the span of over a year of almost non stop fourteen
hour days, Arrhenius had the results: a doubling of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere would increase temperature by five to six
degrees celsius. His calculations are still within modern computer model’s range.
Atmospheric carbon has not yet doubled since Arrhenius’ time, but it has increased. Along with this increase in carbon dioxide,
there has been a noticeable increase in temperature as well. Whether this increase in temperature is caused by the CO₂ increase
is at the center of the debate about global warming. It has been shown that the Earth undergoes cyclical changes in temperature,
and it has been shown that CO₂ can trap heat and energy and therefore increase temperature (Project). The question is which of
these is causing global warming. The answer is that while it is unreasonable to assume that CO₂ causes all of global warming, it
is also unreasonable to assume that the Earth’s cycles cause all of global warming. Although it is impossible to tell exactly how
much warming is due to each, it is reasonable to assume that both the Earth’s cycles and CO₂ have an effect on global
temperatures. And, since this increase in CO₂ has been largely caused by human activity (“The Causes of Climate Change”), it is
reasonable to assume that humans are the cause of at least some, but as much as all global warming. The rest of this thesis will
make the reasonable assumption that mankind is causing a significant amount of global warming, because such an assumption hedges
against the risks of ignoring it (“Scientists agree: Global Warming is Happening and Humans Are the Primary Cause”).
Fortunately, there is less disagreement over the negative impacts of potential global warming. Those who accept global warming
generally agree that there will be large negative impacts from global warming, and even those who don’t agree that global warming
is happening often agree on the negative impacts. The best thing for deciding what to do about global warming is to weigh the
costs and benefits of our options for dealing with it. While it is crude and difficult, an analysis of this kind requires that a
price tag be put on global warming. That way, the costs and benefits of various scenarios for the future can be weighed
objectively and fairly without alarmism or media scares. Due to the high cost of cutting emissions, and the greater good that
money could do elsewhere if spent wisely, much well credited research has shown that moderate emissions reductions below business
as usual forecasts are the optimal course of action for the future, pointing towards the need for low cost solutions (Lomborg 2).
Finite Fossil Fuel Supply
After global warming, the second major problem that the world faces is that our fossil fuel supply is finite. Although this is a
serious topic, real debate on the issue has been stifled in the scientific community because of the impacts of ultimately faulty
doomsday predictions concerning the time and dangers of the peak of fossil fuel production (Lynch). Despite their misleading
nature, however, these predictions do contain some truth. That truth is contained in one of the principle postulates of
economics, that resources are scarce. As to how scarce they are, however, that is a different matter. Fossil fuels, while shown
to be extremely abundant, their need and use is ultimately more abundant. This is where the problem lies.
Fossil fuels are consumables, and by their very definition, consumables are irreversibly reduced when used. This means that used
fossil fuels cannot be restored, which means that with constant use, fossil fuels will eventually run out. This observation
raises the question of when. In the latter half of the twentieth century, multiple dire predictions were made which placed this
time of peak production, as it was called, far sooner than it should have been. As these predictions were far too firm and
contained many serious errors, they have created a sort of taboo out of the concept of peak production, and predictions of it. In
this thesis I will not include any such predictions, but will deal with the topic. The fact remains, however, that fossil fuels
will eventually run out.
The second reason for why the use of finite fossil fuels could be a problem is that not only are fossil fuels bound to run out,
but they are likely to do so relatively soon. Although predictions of when this will happen have been historically inaccurate,
the U.S. Department of Energy officially predicts a likely peak production date of 2044. Because of the historic inaccuracy of
predictions, however, this date is likely also incorrect. This does not mean, however, that fossil fuels will never run out. Even
if 2044 is incorrect, a conservative and reasonable guess is that peak production will occur by the end of this century.
Regardless of whether fossil fuels run out tomorrow or in a thousand years, they will run out. Since fossil fuels provide 82% of
the world’s energy, when this happens, the world will need a solution. That solution must be completely renewable, but currently
renewables are more expensive than fossil fuels. This means that some form of renewable energy source must be made much cheaper
in the near future, or the economy will take a big hit after peak production occurs. The one form of renewable energy that has
the most potential for effective cost cuts is nuclear power, and that is what the world should switch to as soon as possible.



A Brief History of Nuclear Power
Peaceful nuclear power used for electricity generation has its origins in not so peaceful times. Nuclear fission, the sameprocess
that is used in peaceful nuclear power plants for the generation of electricity, is also used in atomic bombs, and the latter
came first. On August 6 and 9, nuclear weapons were used to destroy the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. These new weapons
seemed to have more destructive potential than any weapon used before. With this great potential for destruction, however, comes
an even greater potential for good. Uranium can produce far more energy than fossil fuels, which are thousands of times less
efficient. This great energy potential means that, if applied correctly, nuclear fission could provide massive amounts of
electricity to the world with a low cost. Many of the people who helped design the nuclear bombs knew this, and soon after the
war was over, nuclear power was put to a more benign use in the military, powering large ocean vessels. The next step was
relatively small, and in 1957, the first large scale nuclear power plant went into operation at Shippingport, Pennsylvania. Six
years later, a New Jersey utility ordered a commercial plant to be built and began a wave of over 50 orders in the next few
years. In total, over 100 nuclear power plants were built in the U.S. in about 20 years (A1).
The great nuclear bandwagon in the U.S. came to a screeching halt with an event that occurred on March 28, 1979. That event was
the accident at Three Mile Island nuclear plant, which resulted in a partial meltdown of Unit 2 and a very slight release of
radioactive steam. Although this minor failure was not dangerous at all to the general public, due to the press, the fears were
magnified and the public opinion of nuclear power was changed for good. Even though this disaster was relatively minor, it was
the first of its kind, and for that reason it became a symbol of the dangers of nuclear power. Virtually all R&D for nuclear
power in the U.S. was halted, and very few plants have been built since then (Yergin).
Although the accident at Three Mile Island was the major setback in the U.S, the nuclear industry in Europe had only been slowed.
All this changed, however, when on April 26, 1986, an RBMK reactor in Chernobyl, a town in Soviet controlled Ukraine, exploded.
For various reasons RBMK reactors did not have the containment structures that were ubiquitous in the West. This meant that the
explosion caused a massive amount of radiation contamination in the atmosphere. Hundreds of thousands of people were evacuated,
many of them never to return. Even though what caused the disaster at Chernobyl to be so deadly could not do the same in Western
reactors, across Europe and much of the rest of the world, opposition to nuclear power was solidified. R&D was not only halted,
but reversed, as countries scrambled to shut down their nuclear
reactors. The aftershock of Chernobyl was immense, and it took multiple decades for popular opposition to Nuclear power to cool
to the point at which new R&D could begin in earnest.
The early 2000s saw many new and intriguing movements and among them was a global push for nuclear power known as the “nuclear
renaissance.” Around the world the benefits of
nuclear power were being realized, public opposition due to the TMI and Chernobyl accidents had never been lower, and as a
result, 39 new nuclear power plants went into operation around the world between 2000 and 2010 (A2). But, despite this
comeback, the nuclear power industry had already been damaged beyond repair by TMI and Chernobyl and was waiting for the
critical blow that was bound to come. That blow came on March 11, 2011, when an earthquake above magnitude 9 caused a massive
tsunami which flooded the backing generators at the nuclear power plant in Fukushima Daiichi in Japan. Although the reactors
had been shut down, the coolant stop necessary to prevent a meltdown stopped flowing due to the tsunami. The result was a
level 7 disaster, the highest possible rating and the second ever incident of that level (the
other being Chernobyl). It took 9 months to reach a state of “cold shutdown,” and the disaster cost was immense. This nuclear
disaster in Fukushima became the critical blow to the
global nuclear power industry that was bound to come. The entire nuclear renaissance was reversed, and nuclear plants were closed
for good around the world.
Nuclear energy, because of its great potential for good, has an equal and opposite potential for evil. This great potential for
evil has been highlighted by the threat that nuclear material can be made into nuclear weapons and the threat of various
nuclear accidents, specifically the ones listed above. Because of the amplifying and exaggerating nature of the press, and
the way disasters are viewed by the public, the evils of nuclear power have been held much more strongly in the public eye
than the good. When people think of nuclear power, they think of Hiroshima and Chernobyl, they don’t think of the 400+
nuclear power plants around the world providing the vast majority of the world’s clean energy and saving thousands of lives
that would have been lost to pollution worldwide.
Summary of Issues
In summary, there are two problems facing humanity that must be dealt with in the near future. The first of these two problems is
global warming, and the second is fossil fuel scarcity. To solve these two problems, a solution that is not detrimentally
expensive must be deployed worldwide as soon as possible. This solution must be able to satisfy these criteria in order to
solve the two aforementioned problems: (1) it must be 100% emissions free and (2) it must be completely renewable.
Fortunately, there are a number of choices that satisfy both of these requirements. These choices can be put into two main
categories: (1) conventional renewables and (2) nuclear power. Conventional renewables include all of what most people simply
call “renewables,” and these include various forms of power: wind, solar, hydroelectric, and geothermal, among others..
Nuclear power includes all forms of electricity generation that obtain energy from breaking or creating the bonds which hold
subatomic particles together. The two main forms of this type of power generation are nuclear fusion and fission, and only
fission is currently practical. The choice then comes down to which option is the cheapest overall, with explicit and
implicit costs included in any calculation of total costs.
Nuclear Power Can Combat Global Warming
U.S. Senator Lamar Alexander once said, “nuclear power is the inconvenient solution” to the “inconvenient problem” of  global
warming (A5). That is incorrect. Nuclear power is the extremely convenient solution to the inconvenient problem of global
warming. In Bjørn Lomborg’s The Skeptical Environmentalist, Lomborg uses $5 trillion as his estimate for the total cost of
global warming over the next century (310). He focuses on low cost solutions, because any solution that costs too much risks
being more expensive than global warming itself. With low cost solutions in mind, Lomborg settles on emission reductions of
11% as the optimal path for the future. Unfortunately, he does not take into account nuclear power, because of its current
high cost. If the correct steps to reduce the price of nuclear power are taken, however, the optimal path for the future
could be nearly 100% emissions reductions, as nuclear power has the potential to be the cheapest way to generate electricity.
Nuclear power is the best solution to global warming chiefly because it is 100% emissions free and much cheaper than
conventional renewables (Behr). Burning fossil fuels is the world’s primary source of energy due to the abundance and high
energy density of fossil fuels. The downside to this dependency on fossil fuels, however, is that fossil fuels are largely
composed of hydrocarbons. These large molecules composed of carbon and hydrogen burn well but release CO₂, the main pollutant
causing global warming. Nuclear power today is made by nuclear fission, a process by which the large uranium atoms are split
into smaller atoms, which releases massive amounts of energy. Nuclear power is 100% emissions free as fossil fuel combustion
emissions are caused by the breaking of chemical bonds rather than nuclear bonds. If nuclear power were made to provide 100%
of the world’s energy, mankind would no longer be contributing to global warming (“Climate”).
The other option for combating global warming is conventional renewables. Renewables, by their very nature, are emissions free.
They have many critical problems, however, which make them a bad alternative to fossil fuels, as opposed to nuclear power.
One of the main problems with conventional renewables is that they are not baseload energy sources. A baseload energy source
can be used whenever it is needed. Solar and wind power are available 20% and 30% respectively, but since nuclear power is a
baseload energy source, it is available 90% of the time. Therefore, for conventional renewables to match the availability of
nuclear power, there would have to be three to four times as many renewable farms of the same power output as one nuclear
power plant to match nuclear power. This multiplying of the amount of renewables needed to provide baseload availability also
has the side effect of multiplying prices by the same amount.
Nuclear Can Combat Finite Fossil Fuels
Nuclear power is also the best possible solution to the world’s finite supply of fossil fuels. Fossil fuels are used around the
world far more than any other source of energy. This is not a surprise, as fossil fuels are energy dense, easy to use, and
plentiful. There are multiple downsides to using fossil fuels, however, and among them are that it contributes greatly to
anthropogenic global warming, and that our supply of them is limited. There will come a time when fossil fuels production
will peak, and when it does, the world will need an alternative energy source, one capable of providing an abundance of
energy indefinitely. Fortunately, that source of energy already exists, and is the world’s largest source of renewable energy.
The only known and practicable solution to the problem of fossil fuel scarcity is using renewable energy. Although nuclear is not
generally known as a renewable energy source, it has the potential to be made completely renewable by seawater uranium
extraction. That leaves two options going forward: nuclear energy, or conventional renewables. These two sources of energy
are capable of producing an essentially limitless amount of energy. Once again, the choices are limited to nuclear power and
renewables.
Nuclear power, although not generally known as a renewable, can now be defined as such. Recent advances in seawater uranium
extraction have shown that nuclear power could be the world’s sole energy source indefinitely (Conca). The process of
extraction is quite simple: specially made fibers which absorb uranium are placed in the ocean and left there for a fixed
period, at the end of which they will be saturated with uranium. They are then removed and placed in an acidic solution which
dissolves the uranium. The resulting solution can be used in the majority of nuclear reactors. The fibers can then be reused
to extract more uranium. By this process, nuclear plants can run on seawater uranium indefinitely. This process is
approximately twice the cost of mining uranium from the ground, but since fuel is such a small percentage of the cost of
nuclear power, seawater uranium will not noticeably affect prices.
Uranium mined from the ground is difficult to find, and what we can find will likely only last a few hundred more years. How is
it then, then that seawater uranium can provide the world’s energy indefinitely? The answer lies in the science of
equilibrium constants, a branch of chemistry dealing with concentrations in solutions. This science tells us that the maximum
concentration of U₂₃₈ in seawater is about three parts per billion. Although that is a very small concentration, there is
still enough uranium in the ocean now to power the world for 10,000 years (Conca). What makes nuclear truly renewable,
however, is that no matter how much uranium we take from the ocean, we cannot reduce the concentration below three parts per
billion, because rocks containing uranium on the ocean floor will replace any uranium lost to extraction.
Now that nuclear power has been established as a renewable source of energy, the options for the future come down to nuclear
power and conventional renewables. As with the dispute between the two before, nuclear power is a far better option for
multiple reasons. Nuclear power is much cheaper than conventional renewables. Nuclear power is also much less harmful to the
environment (A3). And lastly, nuclear power has the ability to be implemented universally.
Nuclear Power can be Implemented Universally
The third reason why nuclear power is the best option for solving global warming and finite fossil fuels is that it has the
ability to be implemented universally. Whereas for conventional renewables, location is extremely important, nuclear power is
not dependent on the environment, so it can be put virtually anywhere. Nuclear power also solves the problem of fuel
transportation, because fuel is ubiquitous. Nuclear power also makes use of established technology, and so it is relatively
easy to be adopted. Lastly, SMR’s can provide power to the remote locations which have trouble accessing power.
The first reason nuclear power has the ability to be implemented universally is that plant location is irrelevant. Nuclear power
plants can virtually be built anywhere that a building can be built. Whereas conventional renewables have a relatively small
amount of land on which they can be built, nuclear power does not. That is because while conventional renewables depend on
their environment to produce energy, nuclear power does not. Another reason plant location is irrelevant is that fuel is
ubiquitous. Any country with access to the oceans has an unlimited supply of fuel, and since much of the oceans are
international territory, all nations will have
easy access to nuclear fuel. This easy access fuel is contrasted by the fossil fuel industry, which requires a vast
infrastructure of pipelines, trains, trucks, and refineries to operate.
The second reason nuclear power has the ability to be implemented universally is that it makes use of established technology.
This technology is well known and has been used for many
decades, and therefore is easy to propagate. Nuclear power is already used in 31 countries, and that number is relatively easy to
grow.
The third and final reason that nuclear power has the ability to be implemented universally concerns a special type of nuclear
reactor, known as a small modular reactor or SMR, which has unparallelled potential for providing power to remote areas. SMRs
invariably make use of passive safety features, so they are incredibly easy and safe to use. They are small and built from
parts pre fabricated in factories (Lecompte). And they have variable output designs, so that fluctuating power needs can be
met without surplus or shortage of power. Lastly, they are built to be refueled as little as once every six months, further
increasing their ability to be implemented in remote areas.
For nuclear power location is irrelevant, and plants can be built nearly anywhere. It also makes use of established technology,
so countries that are not STEM leaders can adopt it with ease. And finally, SMRs provide an unrivaled potential for remote power
access. For these three reasons, nuclear power has the ability to be implemented universally.
Safety of Nuclear Power
One of the main reasons why nuclear power is not accepted by the public is concerns over the safety of nuclear power. These
concerns are largely unfounded and caused by an uninformed public, and extremely lopsided with respect to other types of
power generation. When citing the dangers of nuclear power, people often point out the TMI, Chernobyl, and Fukushima
disasters as examples for why nuclear power should not be used. All three of these disasters, however, are essentially the
result of human errors and lack of foresight, and similar accidents are not possible at the majority of nuclear power plants.
Public fears concerning nuclear power are also lopsided, considering there are an estimated 4.2 million deaths from pollution
caused by the burning of fossil fuels every year, and only a few thousand deaths from peaceful nuclear power ever, yet
anti nuclear sentiment is far higher than anti fossil fuel sentiment. Another aspect of this lopsided fear is shown by the
amount of pollution of fossil fuels. All the nuclear waste ever produced, besides the fact that it is not wantonly released
into the atmosphere, is miniscule in comparison to the amount of waste produced by fossil fuels annually.
The three most well known nuclear accidents, TMI, Chernobyl, and Fukushima, serve as a basis for many arguments against the
safety of nuclear power. But despite what the general public may believe, these accidents were flukes, not the norm, and
highly unlikely to happen again. Each of the three disasters had multiple causes, but one main reason for the seriousness of
the disaster.
The nuclear accident at Three Mile Island in New York was, all things considered, relatively minor and inconsequential. There
were no human fatalities, and very little radiation escaped. The main reason that the disaster became so feared by the public
was that the media over hyped it and made it seem like the disaster was far worse than it was. As with Chernobyl, and
Fukushima, there was one main problem which made the disaster far worse. That problem occurred when the disaster began. A
series of equipment malfunctions which would not have normally led to a disaster, did in this case because operators turned
off safety systems when the control room warning signs went on (A4). That caused the minor equipment malfunctions to spiral
out of control and become a full blown, if minor, nuclear disaster.
As with TMI and Fukushima, the disaster at Chernobyl also had its main problem. That problem was the foolish lack of a
containment structure around the reactor core. Had there been a containment structure, there would have been no massive
radiation leak, no evacuation, and no human fatalities. Since there are now no nuclear power plants in the world without
containment structures, nothing like the Chernobyl disaster could ever happen again. This disaster being greatly exaggerated
due to a flaw that does not exist elsewhere is why the closing of nuclear power plants in response to the Chernobyl disaster
across Europe was premature and unnecessary. None of the nuclear power plants shut down in Europe in the aftermath of
Chernobyl could have caused a disaster anything like that at Chernobyl.
The disaster that occurred at the nuclear power plant in Fukushima, Japan, was, like the instances listed above, largely caused
by one preventable mistake. The disaster at Fukushima started with a magnitude 9.3 earthquake off the Coast of Japan, which
created a massive tsunami on a scale never imagined. Although the nuclear plant had sea defenses, this tsunami was much
higher than planned for, and the complex was flooded. Most of the electricity in most of the region had been knocked out, and
to keep the coolant flowing through the reactor core, the back up generators were supposed to kick in. The backup generators
were, however, flooded. This would not have been a problem if they were kept in water tight containers, a simple, relatively
inexpensive task. If the backup generators had been kept in watertight containers, there would have been no disaster to speak
of at Fukushima (A4).
These three disasters, especially the last two, were the result of a fundamental lack
of foresight and common sense. Although they did great harm, the lessons we have learned from
them will likely prevent even more harm in the future. One of the worst aspects of these disasters is perhaps the fact that
dozens of nuclear reactors around the world were closed for no reason at all. And those closed nuclear power plants could
have saved many more lives than
the few fatal disasters took.
The Universal Adoption of Nuclear Power is Inevitable
Nuclear power, although not entirely popular today, and only the source of about 15% of the world’s electricity (“Nuclear Data
Services”), will one day become the predominant source of energy for the world. Barring new and currently unknown sources of
energy being discovered, this transformation is inevitable and the process will begin as soon as peak production happens. The
reasons for this bold prediction are many and interconnected, and there are two ways of examining the future and so reasoning
towards this result. The first is more broad, and the second is more detailed and precise. These two methods are as follows.
The first, more universal method begins with the fact that fossil fuels are finite. This means that they will eventually run out,
leaving the world with far less energy. This will likely happen by the end of this century, but regardless of when it
happens, it will happen. The result of this massive deficit of energy created by a relatively sudden decrease in the supply
of the world’s main source of energy is that the world will need a solution quickly. This solution will need to be renewable,
so that future disasters of this caliber will be avoided.
In current times, politicians and experts would likely point to conventional renewables as the solution. Although ideally
conventional renewables could work, they are not a plausible source of energy for the world, even if they can provide some
sort of niche in the market with electricity. The reality is that the world will have to come to terms with the fact that
nuclear power is the objectively superior source of renewable energy for multiple reasons. The first reason is that nuclear
power is far cheaper. The second reason is that nuclear power is actually able to be implemented worldwide, whereas
conventional renewables cannot without exponential further increases in cost.
The result of this problem and the world realizing its solution is that nuclear power will relatively quickly become the world’s
main source of energy. The logic behind this result can be summed up as follows, and as long as the premises are accepted,
the conclusion necessarily follows. Supply of fossil fuels will eventually decrease to a negligible amount. Nuclear power is
the superior source of renewable energy, and as such it will necessarily be adopted universally. The result is a nearly fully
nuclear powered world.
This argument is a more universal approach to the inevitability of nuclear power, and because it is less detailed will not be
widely accepted. The other approach, more focused on economics, is laid out below in as much detail as possible. The
similarities lie with the premises and conclusion, but the mechanics will be shown in greater detail.
Fossil fuels have been established as a finite source of energy, and as such, they will eventually begin to run out. Fossil fuels
production has followed a relatively stable and constant increase for nearly a century. The point at which fossil fuel
production peaks and begins a constant decrease is known as peak production. This is bound to happen eventually and for this
proof it is irrelevant when. Although some claims have been made that a precipitous drop in production will follow the peak,
this is unlikely. Research shows that the more likely scenario is a gradual decline over the years. This gradual decline in
fossil fuels production will cause the price to increase slowly. A continuation of this process will eventually cause nuclear
power, the cheapest source of renewable energy, to become the dominant source of energy for the world as switching to nuclear
power will generate more profit for firms losing money to high fossil fuels cost.
Assuming an equal amount of innovation for conventional renewables and nuclear power,
the decrease in fossil fuel production will make nuclear power the most competitive option.
This will happen regardless of government intervention, because governments around the world will not want to miss out on the
cheapest form of energy. It is likely that once nuclear becomes
the most competitive option, governments will streamline their regulating process, and help pave the way for more nuclear power.
After these two steps, the peak of fossil fuel production and the resulting competitiveness of nuclear power, the world will
systems will be enough.
These are two slightly differing ways of illustrating the inevitability of nuclear power. Both are  equally true, and both come
to the same conclusion: that nuclear power is inevitable. Here is the logic, simplified and consolidated. First, peak
production will occur, regardless of when. Second, this will indirectly cause nuclear power to become more competitive. This
competitiveness, combined with the world being forced to realize the superiority of nuclear power, will result in essentially
full adoption of nuclear power around the world. Worldwide adoption of nuclear power is inevitable. This brings the
discussion of nuclear power in a different direction. That new direction is: should we adopt nuclear power now or let it
happen on its own?
Why We Should Adopt Nuclear Power Now
Nuclear power has been shown to be inevitable with time, which brings up the question of whether the world should adopt nuclear
power now, or let it happen on its own. There are two main reasons for why nuclear power should be adopted now instead of
later. These reasons are: the scarcity of resources, and global warming. Nuclear power, if it is adopted now, will do far
more to solve these two problems than if it is adopted later.
The first reason nuclear power should be adopted now is that it will solve the problem of scarce fossil fuels. This problem,
although similar to the one explained above, is not identical. It has to do with what fossil fuel is used for besides energy.
These uses include, but are not limited to, plastics, road ways, medicines, computers, appliances, and clothes. There are
thousands of items in daily use by people in developed countries that could not be made the same without fossil fuels. These
products, while being capable of harming the environment in other ways, are not a threat to the climate or global
temperatures. If nuclear power is  allowed to develop by itself by the process explained above the supply of fossil fuels for
everyday products will decrease drastically, causing prices to skyrocket. Things once considered normal and expendable, such
as water bottles, plastic containers, and food packaging, will become luxuries only accessible by the rich. Nuclear power, if
it is adopted immediately, will prolong the arrival of this economic disaster by hundreds of years, and perhaps long enough
to avoid it completely through research and development.
The second reason nuclear power should be adopted immediately is that it helps curb global warming. This problem is the same as
the one laid out above. The problem of anthropogenic global warming caused by CO₂ emissions from the burning of fossil fuels
is solved only by producing our energy from renewable sources. The most advanced and superior source of renewable energy is
nuclear power. This, compounded with the fact that any emissions cuts are far more effective if undertaken now rather than
later, makes nuclear the best solution for global warming, but only if it is adopted immediately.
Lastly, nuclear power should be implemented immediately to avoid the consequences of waiting too long. The problem is that when
the needed transition to another fuel source does happen, it will cause a great deal of disruption. This can be avoided
altogether if the transition takes place in a controlled manner while supply and demand for other energy sources is still
high enough to support the replacement of vast infrastructures with entirely new ones. An expert in this area of study, Dr.
Roger Naill, said on this matter, “...the transition needed to some other source will be disruptive.” Implementing nuclear
power now will considerably lessen the disruptiveness of such a transition, not only because it avoids all the trouble of
peak production, but because, as stated above, nuclear power relies on a much smaller infrastructure.
Economy: How to implement Nuclear Power Worldwide
Now that nuclear power has been established as the best form of renewable energy by a wide margin and it has been made clear that
we should adopt it now instead of letting it happen on its own, there is the question of how this should be done. As it has
been stated above, the main reasons that nuclear power is not far more widespread than it is today are public opposition and
price. Nuclear power is currently shunned by both politicians and the public, and it is too expensive to be taken seriously.
There are relatively simple fixes to both of these obstacles to widespread nuclear power. And they should be taken up by
politicians immediately for the good of the people.
The key in making nuclear power ubiquitous is to use the free market in the least disruptive ways possible to make nuclear power
the most competitive option. The first step in this process is a modest carbon tax between $10 and $30 dollars per ton of
CO₂. Carbon taxes have been shown to reduce emissions by 5 15% in areas where they have been implemented (Lomborg 1). This is
because a carton tax, by increasing the cost of fossil fuels, increases incentives for businesses to reduce emissions. What
better way to reduce emissions than to reduce them completely, with a nuclear power plant instead of a coal plant, for
example? Although many politicians have long been against carbon taxation, their reasons are increasingly dubious and the
reasons for it are many. One reason is that assuming global warming, CO₂ should be considered a pollutant. As such, companies
should be held responsible for polluting the environment, by paying a conservative tax that should be made close to equal to
the actual damage the CO₂ does over time. This is, of course, difficult to calculate, but it could be as much as $30 per ton
(Lomborg 2). A carbon tax will increase the price of fossil fuels, but not enough to bridge the gap between it and nuclear
power.
There are two more things that can be done to at least equalize the prices of fossil fuels and nuclear power. The first of these
two is streamlining the regulation process so that it takes far less time. This will have the effect of decreasing the amount
of time it takes for a nuclear plant to get licensed, which in turn will decrease both the cost and time of building a
nuclear power plant. The current average time for a nuclear plant to get fully licensed is four years. If this time is
shortened to two years, the impact will be immense, and the total cost of building a nuclear plant will decrease (“How We
Regulate”). Shortening regulation time will, along with a conservative carbon tax, substantially decrease the price of
nuclear power, and increase the price of fossil fuels, but likely not enough.
The last large scale change that would have to take place for nuclear power to become the most competitive option is a
wide spread standardization of nuclear plant design. The main reason nuclear power is so expensive is that it takes a large
amount of capital to build a nuclear power plant. Much of this capital goes into cost overruns during construction. These
cost overruns drastically increase the intended price of nuclear plants, often more than doubling the total costs. The best
solution to this problem is to standardize nuclear plant designs. This would solve many problems, including: cost overruns,
regulatory issues, and building time. If done right, a standardized nuclear plant design could be licensed once, then built
many times. A set design, including some prefabricated components built in a factory, would greatly reduce the cost overruns
and the time needed to build a nuclear plant.
Another thing that should be done for nuclear power to be accepted widely is an informal re education of the public. In
democracies around the world, politicians do things to please the people who brought them into office. In many respects,
world leaders mirror the sentiments of their people. This includes the lopsided fear of nuclear power that is held by many
people around the world. This problem has only one solution, and that is for the general public to be educated correctly of
the small risks involved with nuclear power, and the research that points to nuclear power being the safest of all the major
sources of power. This informing of the public is not a task for politicians as much as it is for environmental groups around
the world, that hold a significant amount of influence over the opinions of environmentally minded people around the world.
If a global push for educating the public on the needs for nuclear power is made, then a nuclear powered future could
continue. If not, then the only reasonable solution to both global warming and finite fossil fuel supply will be left in the
hands of fate.
Conclusion
Global warming and energy scarcity, two of the most challenging issues facing humanity, require a solution in the immediate
future. This thesis has offered a solution to these problems, and not just any solution. Nuclear power is the best possible
solution to both these problems. Not only is nuclear power the best solution, but it is so superior that nuclear power as
the world’s primary energy source is inevitable. Despite that inevitability, however, nuclear power should still be adopted
immediately. There is a simple set of steps that would allow lawmakers to implement nuclear power relatively quickly, and
with minimal economic damage. If these steps are undertaken correctly, nuclear power will be able to permanently solve
energy scarcity and greatly reduce the destructive effects of global warming. All of these arguments have been shown in
detail in this thesis, and that is the final stance.
The most powerful arguments for nuclear power stem from two large scale problems that will require solutions in the immediate
future, and these two problems are global warming and fossil fuel scarcity. Global warming is not a new idea, but it’s
popularity is. It is simply more reasonable to believe that mankind is the cause of a significant portion of global warming,
and that is the stance this thesis takes. The negative effects of global warming are going to be large and numerous, and on
this there is less disagreement. The only known way to reduce the effects of global warming is to reduce emissions
significantly in a short amount of time and at a low cost, and there is only one way to do that.
The second large scale problem that begins this thesis is the problem of fossil fuel scarcity. More than 80% of the world’s
energy is obtained through the combustion of fossil fuels, and as the world’s supply of fossil fuels is decreasing with use
and use is increasing every year, the world’s supply of fossil fuels is decreasing more with time. This decrease in tralowes
more and more, strain pressure of the world to develop and use renewable energy sources so that every scarcity wit kinst bela
problem. The biggest obstacle to renewable energy is, as with the solution to global warming, cost.
It is clear that the world needs a new source of energy for the future, particularly one that can solve the problems listed
above. It is also clear that that solution needs to be the most cost effective choice available. That choice is nuclear
power, which for a myriad of reasons is the best choice by a wide margin. The four main reasons for nuclear power are as
follows. The first and second reasons for why nuclear power should be adopted worldwide are the problems of global warming
and finite fossil fuels. Nuclear power is the best solution to both of these problems, and should therefore be adopted
worldwide. Although there are options other than nuclear power, none of these options is nearly as effective or cheap as
nuclear power. The only way to solve the problems of energy scarcity is wod base renewables, and the only way to mitigate the
damage done by global warming is to use emission free energy. Fortunately, most renewables are also emission free, which
means that they will solve both these problems if instituted globally.
This leaves us two options: conventional renewables, or nuclear power. These are the two most mainstream and least expensive
forms of renewable energy and both hold great promise for the future. Nuclear power, however, is by far the cheapest type of
renewable to implement world wide. This is because conventional renewables suffer from severe diseconomies of scale the more
they are implemented exclusively, while nuclear power benefits from the opposite: economy of scale will help nuclear power
the more it is implemented. This is the primary reason that renewables are so much more expensive than nuclear and therefore
a far worse choice for the world’s future.
Even with all these things in the favor of nuclear power, it is still denounced by governments and the people as being too
dangerous to use. This general fear of nuclear power is lopsided and largely caused by three nuclear accidents. These three
accidents, TME, Chernobyl, and Fukushima, were all caused by multiple problems which could not happen at any other reactor in
the world. This caused the closing of dozens of harmless nuclear plants around the world, which naturally caused massive
deadweight loss. That loss was not purely monetary, however, as new research has shown that nuclear power is by far the best
source of energy in terms of lives lost to pollution. Any time nuclear power is replaced by fossil fuels, more lives will be
lost in the long run due to that shift.
Nuclear power is not generally very popular today, as it only produces about 15% of the world’s electricity. It will, however,
one day make up the majority of the world’s energy production. The proof is as follows. First, regardless of when, the
world’s production of fossil fuels will one day peak, and that peak will be followed by a gradual decline. This decline will
cause the prices of fossil fuels to increase, and eventually this increase will lead to nuclear power being the most
competitive form of every generation, and this in turn will eventually lead to nuclear power becoming the most widely used
energy source.
Now that nuclear power has been shown to eventually surpass other energy sources without intervention, why should we intervene
now in order to bring about sooner what will happen in the future? The answer has to do with the same reasons nuclear power
should and will be adopted worldwide. The first reason is global warming. The effect of nuclear power’s lack of carbon
emissions will be far greater if it is adopted immediately. The second is resource scarcity. Although nuclear power will end
the need for fossil fuels in energy production, fossil fuels are still used for a great number of other useful things, and
the sooner combustion of fossil fuels is halted, the greater our supply of fossil fuels for other things will be.
Global warming is one of the most important issues to politicians today, while energy scarcity has been in the background.
Together, however, these two impending problems make up a significant portion of the upcoming hurdles facing humanity. It is
rare that a single solution is found for two problems of such magnitude, but when the choice is there, it is the
responsibility of world leaders to accept the solution for the good of their people. One such solution is nuclear power,
which has been shown to be capable of solving both of the major problems mentioned above. It is time for leaders to prove
that they are actually leaders, not followers, and embrace the usefulness of nuclear power for the good of their people.
works cited

Isaac Asimovs Prodigiousness and Prolificity
Isaac Asimov was one of the most prolific writers of our time. He was also a child prodigy. From an early age, he displayed signs
of prodigiousness. He was extremely bright, a fast learner, and a good reader. He passed through school quickly and with
little effort, graduating from high school at the early age of 15. When he was younger, Asimov devoured the public library
books quickly and he desired to own his own books. So, he began writing. At first a disappointing writer with little
experience, Asimov’s passion for writing led to continued attempts and long hours at a typewriter until he developed a good
writing style. When his first book sold, he was able to write almost full-time, and because he loved it he wrote and
continued to write with great prolificity for the rest of his life.
Isaac Asimov was a proud and vain man, and so when asked if he was a child prodigy, he liked to answer, “Yes, indeed, and I still
am” (7 Asimov 27). He need not have worried, for by most standards he was a child prodigy. Before entering preschool, he
taught himself how to read. He would wander about asking the older kids what letters meant and learned quickly. Asimov then
taught his similarly talented younger sister how to read, showing his teaching skills at an early age. While in elementary
school, Asimov was a show-off and a know-it-all. He simply did not understand that the other students were not quite as
bright as he was. He would parade his mental abilities and liked to show-off to others his talent. As a result of his
prodigiousness, Asimov was pushed ahead multiple grades and completed elementary school early.
As soon as he began to read, Asimov needed more material. He quickly devoured all that was presented to him and, naturally, ran
out of books. At first he compensated by reading everything he had multiple times. Eventually, his parents recognized his
need for more reading material, and bought him a public library card of his own. Asimov then began going to the library as
much as possible, reading a large amount of good literature that he picked out himself. He read many books, including the
complete works of Shakespeare, the Iliad, The Three Musketeers, and many others. He also borrowed many of the pulp fiction
magazines from the family candy shop, and read them with enthusiasm. With time, he gravitated towards the science fiction
magazines, which he eventually read almost exclusively. Isaac Asimov read so much as a child that he was what we would
consider socially rejected. He himself, however, did not think so. He said, “I sat by myself with my books and felt sorry for
the other kids” (4 Asimov 29). Although he was an extrovert and very talkative, Asimov Thought that reading alone was better
than playing with the other kids.
Isaac Asimov began to write at the early age of eleven. He was so obsessed with reading and disliked returning all his books to
the library so much that he finally decided to copy one of the library books by hand so that he might have his own permanent
reading material. After realizing the impracticality of this idea, he turned to writing his own books as permanent reading
material. His first attempts at writing were clumsy and foolish, and it took him a long time to improve. All of his attempts
at writing eventually ran down, and he did not know what he was doing wrong. He continued for a long time, however, and said
later, “Every once in a while I would drift back to try my hand at writing again. Nothing lasted very long for quite a number
of years, but I never quit altogether” (6 Asimov 109). It was Asimov’s passion for writing that did not allow him to quit,
and that same passion that caused him to become a truly prolific writer, because he would rather write than do anything else
in the world.
Isaac Asimov entered high school early and was very young for his grade. Because of his natural talent, his parents sent Asimov
to a very challenging and competitive school, Boy’s High. In high school, he still got very good grades, but was dismayed to
find out that he was no longer the smartest kid anymore. He was not even in the top five in grade averages, and this hit him
hard. Asimov considered that a failure, and liked to blame that failure on his lack of time. He said:
As for me, I still had the candy store to work in, so that my time for studying was limited. Besides, I made no real effort to
find time for study. My stubborn notion was that I simply didn’t have to study. I read the schoolbooks and listened to the
teacher and that was it.
Well, saying so doesn’t make it so, and if I had truly wanted to compete, truly felt that I had to get higher marks, I would
have swotted away––but I refused. I decided I didn’t have to because I needed no record marks to prove to myself that I
was remarkable (4 Asimov 51).
Asimov’s parents made him work in the family candy shop for hours, and he refused to struggle to find the time to do schoolwork
as well. Asimov graduated from Boy’s High School at the extremely early age of fifteen, and went on to apply to a few nearby
colleges, including Columbia University.
When Isaac Asimov was seventeen (a junior in college, remember), he finally found out how to write and finish a story. He began
the story “Cosmic Corkscrew”, worked on it periodically, and decided he wanted to submit it to the science fiction magazine
Astounding. At his father’s wish, he went straight to the editor, John Campbell, to ask that his story be published. Although
the story was rejected, the rejection letter he received was so kind that Asimov quickly turned to writing another story. He
continued to write as much as possible, submitting as many stories as possible to science fiction magazines in the hope of
one getting published. Finally, four months after Asimov’s first visit to Campbell, he sold his first story, but not to
Campbell. He sold it to a lower quality magazine, Amazing Stories, because his writing was still too poor to be published by
Astounding.
Isaac Asimov continued to write through the end of his time in college. He submitted as many stories as he could, but only a few
got accepted and published. By the end of college, Asimov’s family expected him to become a medical doctor, but none of the
schools he applied to would accept him. Asimov attributed this to the fact that he was a Jew, even if he did not practice or
believe in the religion. Instead, he applied to the Ph.D. program in the university, and was accepted. While he was working
on his Ph.D, the U.S. entered World War Two. Asimov’s friend convinced him to pause work on his Ph.D. and go to work at the
Naval Air Experimental Station (NAES) in Philadelphia, finding solutions to basic problems in the army. He thought that
working for the army would help keep him out of the draft, and it did, for a time. After he finished his job at the NAES,
however, he was drafted, but just after the war had ended.
While working at the NAES, Asimov’s time for writing decreased drastically, and during the first year he did not write at all.
When he began writing again, however, his writing (or maybe his ideas) somehow improved. Soon after Asimov began to write
again, he started writing the Foundation stories, which were later collected into books and won multiple awards, including
the Hugo “for the best all time science fiction series.” For a long time, Asimov had been interested in history, reading
books on the subject as a child and almost deciding to major in it at college. Finally, Asimov’s passion for science fiction
and love of history combined into the Foundation stories, a sort of future history vaguely concerning the decline and fall of
the Galactic Empire and (you guessed it) inspired by Edward Gibbon’s History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. In
keeping with the style of science fiction books of the time, however, Asimov added many logical puzzles and quandaries. Here
is an example, as stated by Hari Seldon in Foundation, “This, by the way, is a rather straightforward crisis, much simpler
than many of those that are ahead” (3 Asimov 81). Although the Foundation series is one of the most highly acclaimed works in
all of science fiction, there are those who still dislike it. Charles Elkins, for one, seems to have trouble finding exactly
what makes the Foundation series so good and so decides that it is very bad instead. He wrote: “It is difficult to put one’s
finger on precisely what element or elements so fascinate readers. From just about any formal perspective, The Foundation
Trilogy is seriously flawed” (Elkins 1). Because Elkins found difficulty in finding out why people liked the books so much,
he tries to pin it on the grandness of the idea, the idea of a great Galactic Empire’s demise and fall and eventual return,
which he directly compares to Marxism.
Soon after Isaac Asimov began work on his Foundation series, he also began working on one of his other most well known and
acclaimed works, the Robot series. Like Foundation, I, Robot also began as a growing collection of short stories published by
science fiction magazines. Asimov also wrote these in the predominant style of science fiction books of the time, with even
more logic puzzles, all based on the Three Laws of Robotics, which are ingrained deeply into the mind of every robot produced:
One, a robot may not injure a human being, or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm...Two...a robot must obey
the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict with the First Law…[T]hree, a robot must protect
its own existence as long as such a protection does not conflict with the First or Second Laws (2 Asimov 37).
The first stories were collected into a book titled I, Robot, which covers the future history (again?) of the first and largest
fictional robot company over a span of fifty years, tracking the experiments and logical dilemmas the main characters get
into while pioneering the advanced science of robotics. One such logical quandary is neatly summed up by what Susan Calvin, a
‘robopsychologist,’ says after solving the problem:
So we warned every robot in advance that gamma rays would kill them, which it would,and we further warned them all that gamma
rays would be between them and myself.
You see it wasn’t gamma rays that flooded the area between myself and the robots––but infrared rays. Nestor 10 knew they were
infrared and harmless and so he began to dash out, as he expected the rest would do, under First Law compulsion (2 Asimov 142).
This was the solution to the problem of finding a robot with a slightly modified First Law which had hidden itself among 62 other
identical robots of the same model without a modified First Law.
As Isaac Asimov grew older, he wrote more and more and grew further and further away from his parent’s faith, Orthodox Judaism.
He eventually became an atheist, and began to see the world through the lens of an atheist. He said about the history of
Judaism, “The picture of the returning king was idealized as introducing a wonderful golden age and, indeed, the rewards of
virtue were removed from the present (where it manifestly was not taking place) and put into a golden future” (1 Asimov 19).
Some have even thought that Asimov’s greatest achievement, his Foundation series, was merely a way for Asimov to attempt to
solve the problems of utilitarian calculations. One such person, Joseph Miller, wrote that, “There are the utilitarians...who
hold that morality really is fundamentally concerned with producing the best overall consequences...Asimov’s own view, at
least as expressed in the FOUNDATION series...expresses a commitment to promoting the greatest good for all of humanity, an
explicitly utilitarian goal” (Miller 189). Miller’s idea is that Asimov is a utilitarian at heart and that this is revealed
in his Foundation series. Asimov’s Foundation series is indeed oriented toward the greatest good for humanity approach,
although Asimov himself never professed himself to be utilitarian in any way.
Isaac Asimov’s prodigiousness, prolificity, and love of reading resulted in his possession of a wide range of knowledge covering
nearly every field. As a result of this, he liked to make predictions of what the world would be like in a number of years.
As an atheist and science fiction writer, those predictions were affected by his works and beliefs, and because of them, some
were spot-on and some were wrong. For example, in 1964, when New York City hosted The World’s Fair, Asimov wrote articles for
The New York Times about what the world would be like in 1990 and 2014. As was written in Population and Development Review,
vol. 40, no. 3, Asimov “...saw widespread birth control as a requirement for “any civilized world.”” (Vol. 40, no. 3, 2014,
pp. 553–558. 553). Asimov thought that this would come to pass by 2014 at the latest, but this was wrong, mainly because he
underestimated the effects of the billions of Christians around the world who would never accept such policies from their
leaders. Asimov also predicted that the television would more and more become the center of family life in the household by
2014, which was spot-on because of Asimov’s atheistic beliefs. Indeed, while many Christian families keep television use at
an absolute minimum, many more do not, and that combined with the secular world’s near complete lack of restraint meant that
this turned out to be one of Asimov’s most accurate predictions.
Because he was so prodigious, Isaac Asimov developed his own distinctive writing style. Asimov himself believed that he
consciously caused his own writing style. On inspection of his life, however, it seems clear that Asimov’s past heavily
influenced his writing style. His style was influenced heavily not only by all the high-quality literature he read as a
child, but also by the pulp fiction magazines he read. The result was a writing style that took the best from both realms and
combined it into a cohesive whole. In that Asimov’s style was more colloquial yet still formal and correct, it was and still
is very smooth and easy reading. This meant that Asimov was well ahead of his time, and it contributed greatly to his early
and numerous sales. Although his style was rigid and relatively consistent, the actual quality of his writing varied from
time to time. At his best of times, when Asimov wrote well, he called it, “...writing over my head” (4 Asimov  249). Asimov’s
favorite example of this (indeed, his favorite short story of all time) was his story The Last Question, which Asimov thought
was his personal best. The story begins excellently with the witty statement: “The last question was asked for the first
time, half in jest, on May 21, 2061…” (5 Asimov 234). The story has a good premise, good writing, and an amazing final line
that all adds up to produce one of Asimov’s best stories.
Throughout his life, Isaac Asimov was a great prodigy. A man with high intelligence, the cleverness of a fox, and an imagination
as broad as the sea, Asimov was the perfect man to have such a huge passion for writing that he simply did not stop: over an
entire lifetime of writing his mind had not the time to empty completely. Although he graduated from high school at the early
age of 15, he ended up getting his Ph.D. later than normal because of the war. Although time for writing was scarce those
days, Asimov’s passion for it overrode his difficulty finding time and he wrote many of his most successful stories then. He
developed his own writing style, which was way ahead of its time, and which was part of the reason for his huge success. By
the time the rest of the science fiction field caught up to Asimov’s smooth writing style, Asimov, with his characteristic
prodigiousness, spontaneously switched to writing science non-fiction and made even more money that way. Asimov’s prolificity
permeated his way of life from when he first started selling his works to the end of his life. He worked his way up to the
point where he was publishing multiple books in a single year. This was a man, who, although he had many shortcomings (pride,
laziness), had one all-encompassing and overriding strength: he loved to write!!

Gatsby’s Failure in Success
In F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby, Jay Gatsby himself, the subject of the book, is the very embodiment of the
American dream and of success itself. Throughout the novel, readers learn that Gatsby struggles and fights his entire
life to become one of the few; he dreams big, achieves great things, and in the end he wins big. In the midst of his
journey to the top, however, Gatsby finds a living symbol on which to supplant the very ideals he fights for. While this
transferral of his dreams to the young Daisy Fay is sealed with a kiss, Gatsby’s dreams are also sealed, embedded in that
immovable image of Daisy as the embodiment of perfection and beauty. With this immobile seal, Gatsby becomes ensnared in
his own dreams, his own solid image of Daisy failing to recognize the change in her over the years.
Jay Gatsby’s life of riches had humble beginnings in North Dakota on the shores of Lake Superior, when he was living a life
of poverty and scraping a living together with odd jobs and hardiness. He needed something to live for, something to look
forward to, so he took comfort in his wild fantasies of himself and his presupposed greatness. He knew that he would do
great things, and never doubted himself for one second. In describing Gatsby’s past, Nick says, “Each night he added to
the pattern of his fancies until drowsiness closed down upon some vivid scene with an oblivious embrace” (Pg. 99). These
are the wild, over-zealous dreams that made Gatsby who he was. And when all the dreams of his future were wedded to
Daisy’s lips, the very moment that solidified Gatsby’s dreams and pushed him to success became his downfall as well.
These dreams of Gatsby’s future glory had an immediate and cumulative effect on him. He made himself always ready to take the
initiative, always ready for a chance to prove his worth to the world. Gatsby was ready to work hard and push himself, he
was willing to do whatever it took to accomplish his dreams. So, when he finally saw his chance, waiting on the waters of
Lake Superior in the form of Dan Cody’s Yacht, he took it and rowed out to the boat to warn Cody of impending danger.
Then, “...Cody asked him a few questions...and found that he was quick and extravagantly ambitious” (Pg. 100). This
rendezvous proved to be the starting point of Gatsby’s magnificent rise to glory. He became Cody’s assistant, personal
helper and friend, and gained Cody’s complete trust, to the point of Cody giving Gatsby twenty-five thousand dollars upon
his death. Later, Gatsby would use this money to begin his quick rise to wealthiness and class.
Jay Gatsby’s dreams and the extreme effort he gave to accomplish them provided just the right combination by which he could
do anything. While from the beginning Gatsby’s dreams were glorious and powerful, they did not have a definitive object;
there was no distinct goal. Then, on the fateful night on which Gatsby kissed Daisy, the goal of his dreams became
embodied in a living person, they became entombed in that image of Daisy as the model of perfection. From then on, all of
Gatsby’s efforts and dreams would be directed toward obtaining Daisy. He knew what had to be done: he needed wealth, he
needed fame, and he needed to become a first class citizen. He knew what had to be done, and he did it. He succeeded. He
made himself a man of great wealth, elevated himself to a social class to which he did not initially belong, all so that
he could have Daisy.
Although Gatsby succeeded in accomplishing what was necessary to fulfill his dreams, he did not, ultimately, obtain Daisy. The
shock of the novel is that in the end, with all the work Gatsby put in, all the dreams he dreamed, after everything he tried,
nothing worked. He could not have the prize. It is the fact that Daisy changed, that Gatsby’s image of her never could
change, and that his dreams went far beyond the reality of Daisy, that causes Gatsby’s epic failure. Nick could see that from
the very beginning of their relationship, and says, “There must have been moments even that afternoon when Daisy tumbled
short of his dreams…” (Pg. 95). Daisy simply could not live up to Gatsby’s alluring yet gravely expanded visions of reality,
and through no fault of her own. There is not a woman alive who could live up to Gatsby’s dreams. Another reason why Gatsby
failed in obtaining Daisy is that, because his imagination had so inflated her, he did not really know what she would want,
and how he could attract her. So, despite all of Gatsby’s riches and grandeur, despite years of hard work and ambitions put
to rest, despite the greatest success possible, he failed.
The Great Gatsby is a brilliant novel that is highly nuanced and full of ulteriority, but only came to fame years after its
meager beginnings. As the novel itself became great over time, so Jay Gatsby, the main subject of Nick Caraway’s scrutiny,
becomes great over time. Gatsby dreamed and worked, he allowed his ambitions to take control, but in the end, he could not
have what he worked and dreamed so much for, simply because he dreamed. While Gatsby was made by his dreams, so he fell by
his dreams, and the person for whom he dreamed rejected the very lies that constituted the greater part of his dreams.

A human being unjustly shot. A town burning while the inhabitants flee. Thousands of innocents sacrificed to the ideals of a
maniac. What do these things have in common? They are all the polar opposite of peace. Another word for it is war and it is
what all good leaders strive to suppress. In some cases , one nation must go to war in order that others are restored to
peace. This is the case in World War II, when the United States of America fought for the return of peace in Western Europe.
This war for peace can only bring peace if the individuals engaged in it are themselves peaceful when necessary.
The most important and critical scene in Richard Bausch’s novel Peace is a flashback. It occurs at the beginning, and it is a
result of the main character Marson’s storytelling mind. Trudging through the icy mud and rain, Marson ponders the previous
day’s events. He, like the rest of his reconnaissance outfit, is utterly disgusted at Sergeant Glick’s coldblooded killing of
a prostitute. whore. Although she was with a Nazi, she had done no harm to the American forces, and yet Glick “...walked
over, put the end of his carbine at her forehead, and fired” (2). This murder is in direct conflict with the goal of the U.S.
in WWII. The goal is peace, absolute and lasting, and that is what the soldiers came for. It is impossible to achieve peace,
however, if those who came to establish it do things that do not facilitate it.
Throughout the remainder of the novel, none of the relevant characters in Marson’s reconnaissance outfit is are able to
forget what Glick did. There are constant reminders, and it is always on their minds and the tips of their tongues.
Midway through discussions of things that are far from reminding them of the woman whore, they would stop abruptly and
think about what Glick did and what they should do about it. While Marson and Joyner sat in a jeep to avoid the rain, the
conversation abruptly turned foul: “I don’t give a shit about it” (9). Joyner said this to Marson suddenly. Marson did
not want to talk about it, though, and tried to change the subject.
Slowly but surely, the three most relevant characters, Joyner, Asch, and Marson, were coming to the conclusion that what
Glick did was wrong, and that they should report it. Although Asch and Joyner remained in disagreement, Marson and Asch
agree that they should report the incident. Marson was more of a quiet person and kept his opinions to himself but since
the book is centered around Marson, his thoughts are made clear to the reader several times. At this point, miles up a
large mountain on a seemingly futile reconnaissance mission, an at first benign conversation again abruptly turns to the
murder of the prostitute. whore. In the middle of talking about the war, Asch says out of the blue, “I guess we have to
go to battalion headquarters first” (48). This is the first time any one of the main characters seriously suggests
reporting Glick. Marson, however, knows that thinking about such things would only make them more depressed at a time
like this, so he attempts to divert their thoughts.
Finally, after hiking so high that they reach the point of snowfall on the mountain, an event occurs that solidifies the
position of the three men on their opinions of the shootingwhore and their place in the war. Shortly after coming across
a dead German soldier, while resting so as not to catch up with the Germans, they hear gunshots in the distance. “They
listened and the shooting went on, slow, gaps of a few seconds between shots, a volley each time, a firing squad, and the
Germans were apparently shooting a lot of people, lining them up and shooting them down” (114). Spaced at regular
intervals, volley upon volley of apparent execution of Jews has the men rethinking much of what they took for granted.
For Marson, this meant further separation from his memories of his family for the sake of his sanity. For Asch, this
meant a commitment to report the murder of the whore upon his return to the main body of the army. And for all of them,
it meant a reconsideration of their duty, and a new understanding of the peace they were fighting for.
Richard Bausch’s The novel Peace by Richard Busch is a strict admonition of any war crimes committed by soldiers fighting for
peace. It shows how any of the men engaged in a war for peace who commit crimes that are not peaceful cannot possibly
bring peace to the land they are fighting for. The novel does this by focusing on a small group of men who witnessed one
such war crime, and it shows how such men, when faced with truly horrendous acts, can come together in their beliefs and
agree on the meaning of peace.

You have said, regarding the patient’s studies, that he has a great amount of care for the completion of his work, while he lacks
the attention to detail necessary to produce any truly fine work. By this I do not mean any intellectually great or
artistically fine work, but work done well, work he can be proud of. This is a flaw that is not particularly of much use to
us, as long as it stays in the realm of his work and material things. It is, however, just such a flaw that when applied to a
human’s spiritual work can produce for us one of the most common useful kinds of sinners in this age. That is, a slothful
person.
Now, you have also mentioned that the patient is still spiritually sound, keeping that crucial attention and care which is
necessary for good prayer. What I have not heard from you, however, is how you exploited this lack of care regarding his work
and attempted to connect it to his spiritual life. This makes me suspect that perhaps you have not yet made this connection,
and therefore have not yet exploited it. This is a disgusting showing of your intelligence, or lack thereof, and makes me
question your hopes for the future. Even the dullest tempters can have the correct procedures beaten into them, however, and
have no fear, I will not hesitate to turn you over to the School for Incompetent Tempters should you continue such stupidity.
I am afraid I have been carried away in my hatred. Now, where were we? Ah yes, how to make the patient’s carelessness with work
apply to his spiritual duties as well. It is important to realize that the first step in doing so is to keep him from
noticing his own carelessness. If he once realizes the extent that this carelessness has reached, the Enemy will immediately
be by his side, aiding him in realizing the extent that this flaw has reached and what he must do to reverse it. With this in
mind, proceed with caution, in order that you never awaken the patient’s intellect to his faults.
Now that this important principle has been covered, we continue on to the real work. An important realization to make is that
this lack of attention to detail is caused at heart by the patient’s not considering the importance of his work, and not
striving to achieve perfection, the way he does with his spiritual life. This lack of thought concerning the importance of
his actions must now be transferred to his spiritual actions, especially his prayer. This can be done in multiple ways, and
different strategies have been implemented in different times. Today, however, the chief strategy is to distract him, and
keep his mind continually on other things. Thanks to the highly materialist culture in which he lives, this is quite easily
done. Simply keep him in constant reach of his electronic devices, which he can use to stay ‘connected’ at all times,
regardless of where he is. It was the work of the great forces below that have caused the perversion of the ‘American’ way to
be twisted into a constant demand for Earthly pleasures in an amount that is beyond any human’s reach. In any case, this
overflow of video-games, social media, and various other time wasting methods should put a stop to his care in prayer and the
sacraments.
I have also detected an exaggerated amount of pleasure in your writing that you have undoubtedly taken from the global
‘pandemic,’ and the suffering it has caused. You should be more focused on the use we can make of it than on the ‘pandemic’
itself. An example of this is the way by which we have caused far more suffering than necessary by influencing the leaders to
shut down economies around the world. One result of this lack of good judgment is the unemployment of many millions of people
around the world, to the effect that a global recession has been caused out of fear for a disease marginally more deadly than
the seasonal flu! This is a prime example of how these kinds of events can be exploited to our benefit, and the same must be
done to all individual human beings.
Your affectionate uncle

When reading the poem “On Being Human” by C. S. Lewis, one cannot help but have the thought that something is missing. The poem
compares humans and angels, and begins by mentioning  angel’s perfect intelligence. It then makes a surprise turn and says
that no angel can feel a cool shadow under a tree on a hot, sunny day, no angel can feel the inhalation of warm summer air,
no angel can feel the pleasures of the world. The poem references several nostalgically familiar feelings, such as the taste
of ripe peaches, the scent of wood burning in a fireplace, the sight of a beautiful sunset. The odd feeling that something is
missing, however, continues.
Over the length of the poem, familiar feelings are mentioned from various senses. The first is the sense of touch; “The blessed
cool at every pore caressing us” (15). It is easy to recall the soothing feeling of shade on a hot summer day. Then, Lewis
mentions the sense of sight; “The lavish pinks…” (19). This appears to be a reference to a sunset, or another natural beauty.
Next comes smell; “...the ravishing/Sea-smells...” (19-20). Most of us know the wonderful scent of the sea, wafting up from
the foaming wave-tops. Finally, Lewis then mentions the sense of taste, saying; “The ripe peach from the southern wall still
hot...” (28). The taste of a fresh, ripe peach is nearly unrivalled in nature, and therefore it is a potent image in poetry.
These are all the senses Lewis mentions in this poem. Most human beings, however, have five senses. Which one is left out? I
realized while listening to a good song that what is missing is the sense of hearing.
One can only guess at the purpose of this omission, if it was intentional. Perhaps C. S. Lewis was hard of hearing, but unless he
was completely deaf, this is unlikely the reason. More probable is that he was unable to fit it in, or that he just forgot
about it. Regardless, for those of us who are fond of good music, or are perfectionists, despite its beauty, this will always
be known as the poem with something missing.

Perhaps one of the most famous speeches in all of Shakespeare and definitely the most recognizable, the “To be or not to be”
soliloquy by Hamlet Shakespeare’s Hamlet is not, as some scholars say, something Shakespeare wrote for a rainy day. The
soliloquy is an integral part of the play, set almost exactly in the middle, and reflects the rest of the play carefully and
most precisely. Although there may be some minor inaccuracies, these are due to the exaggerating tendencies of a writer
attempting to write something grand, and none of the errors is error enough to warrant the thought that this soliloquy was
not written for the play. Most of the arguments for this soliloquy being a cut and paste job stem from a particular litany of
wrongs midway through the speech and a seeming contradiction later on. Both of these arguments are ultimately unfounded as we
shall soon see.
The arguments that some have made concerning the legitimacy of the “To be or not to be” soliloquy as an original piece of work
for Hamlet usually focus on the inaccuracies of the speech as opposed to the accuracies. The main source for these
inaccuracies is a small litany of seven wrongs at the heart of the speech. About half of these wrongs are undisputed in
their connection to the rest of the play. This is where the problem lies. Arguments focusing on inaccuracies completely
ignore the fact that there are as many undisputed accuracies as there are contested inaccuracies. Things are never what they
seem, and even those inaccuracies may not even be inaccuracies after all.
One of the inaccuracies commonly pointed out as being evidence for the ‘back pocket’ argument is when Hamlet says, “For who would
bear the whips and scorns of time” ( 3.1.78 ). This would seem to be a reference to old age, and if it were, that would
indeed make this a grave inaccuracy, as Hamlet has suffered no such problem. This is not on issue, however, as although this
statement almost certainly refers to old age (Who could pose a fair argument against that?), it does not refer to Hamlet’s
old age (which does not exist). For, in the beginning of Hamlet’s litany of wrongs, he says, “For who” (3.1.78), not
referring to himself but to all mankind. Indeed, when one takes a look back at the beginning of this famous soliloquy, one
realizes that the whole thing, up to and including the litany, is a generalization of all mankind, and is meant to encompass
not just a few of Hamlet’s particular cases, but everyone’s reasons for suicide. By this reasoning it is amazing that Hamlet
shares so many suicidal notions with the rest of humanity. there some have been led to believe that all of the reasons given
are Hamlet’s.
The other two contested objects in the litany of wrongs are; “the law’s delay…” (3.1.80) and “...the insolence of office…”
(3.1.81). Both these cases are marginal in the case for whether they relate to Hamlet or not. It is certainly difficult to
argue either way, if not impractical. Delay of justice and abuse of power both seem to be implicitly involved in many ways,
but at the same time are more vague and less obvious, and certainly not major themes. However, this uncertainty is irrelevant
for the reasons listed above. That is, they do not have to pertain to Hamlet for the litany of wrongs to be legitimate as a
Hamlet original. They just have to be ‘legitimate’ reasons for a given person to commit suicide, and that person does not
necessarily have to be Hamlet.
Finally, one of the main points for the argument against an original “To be or not to be” soliloquy is an apparent contradiction
in the second half. This is a seeming contradiction between the soliloquy and the rest of the play. Hamlet says; “No
traveller returns” ( 3.1.88 ), again
making a general statement which definitely means nobody returns from the dead. The contradiction lies in that a fundamental part
of the play is Hamlet’s dad coming back as a ghost to inform Hamlet of his death. This is not a contradiction, however, as
Hamlet’s dad never actually came back. A ghost came back instead, and it is impossible to know for sure that this ghost is
actually Hamlet’s dad or not. Therefore, this statement by Hamlet is not really
a contradiction, but perhaps the word ‘alive’ was omitted for the sake of the structure of this soliloquy.
There is a debate among scholars as to whether the famous “To be or not to be” speech was written for Hamlet or not. Those who
say this speech was not original with respect to Hamlet generally base their arguments on a few inaccuracies which are not
even inaccuracies upon closer inspection. Moreover, none of the debaters once acknowledges the fact that Shakespeare is a
human writer. Writers have a tendency to over–exaggerate sections of writing intended to be grandiose. It is not unthinkable
that Shakespeare, in his quest for a grand speech (which succeeded, mind you) overstepped a few boundaries in a way not
unlike the vast majority of other writers.

Kairos is the central decisive moment in a work of literature which leads either to success or failure. Kairos is manifested in
different ways by different authors, depending on the requirements of a given type of book. A biography, for example, would
generally require the Kairos of the plot to be the Kairos of the life of the subject of the biography. A book without a plot
may or may not have a Kairos at all. A fictional novel, however, will almost invariably have a Kairos, since a novel would
require a plot, and a plot requires a kairos.
The Quiet Light by Louis de Wohl is mainly about the life of Sir Piers Rudde, an English knight who becomes a baron by the end of
the book. Because this book focuses on much of the entire life of Piers Rudde, there are multiple Kairos. The most important
Kairos in this book, however, is when Piers Rudde, now a baron, decides to join the crusades for the sole purpose of
protecting Countess Theadora’s husband. He says, “Set your mind at rest. I shall go now. God bless you” (333). Although Baron
Rudde loves Theodora, and has from the moment he first saw her, she is now married to someone else, so Piers has devoted his
life to protecting her and her loved ones. His decision to follow Theadora’s husband on the Crusade is the last in a long
string of events in which Piers has strived to keep Theadora and her family safe and well. It is the most important because
although the mission was a failure, Friar Thomas later said that because Piers had done all he could, it was a success just
as much as all his other missions were successes.
Man’s Search for Meaning by Viktor E. Frankl is part autobiography; a retelling of Frankl’s life in the concentration camps, and
part psychological research essay. Because the main plot of the book is focused on Viktor Frankl’s life in the concentration
camps, Kairos is to be found somewhere in this part of the book. The Kairos, therefore, is when Viktor Frankl finally decided
to find meaning in his suffering by observing his experiences in the concentration camps from a scientific viewpoint. This
allowed him to see beyond the pain and move forward with his life, now as research. He says, “I was giving a lecture on the
psychology of the concentration camp! All that oppressed me at that moment became objective seem and described from the
remote viewpoint of science” (73). And just like that, Viktor Frankl had found a way to keep going, not in spite of his
suffering, but by using it as research that would aid many others.
Skyfaring by Mark Vanhoenacker is a book that is partially about a pilot’s life but mostly meditations on flight and the
experiences of our longest journeys. This book does not technically have a plot, and as such, Kairos is difficult to find.
There is, however, a very short autobiographical section in the beginning of the book. Vanhoenacker’s passion was flying. He
loved flying very much, loved all aspects of flying. He thought, however, that a career in flying, because he loved it so
much, could never be practical. The Kairos of this section is when Mark Vanhoenacker finally decides to follow his passion
and pursue a career in flying. He says, “I left that degree program when I finally realized I wanted to become a pilot” (6).
Although his mind was now made up, his path was not. It took him many years before he could finally fulfill his dream and fly
airliners for a living. This is how his decision eventually leads to Vanhoenacker’s success at becoming an airline pilot.
This decision even led, ultimately, to the writing of Skyfaring.
Kairos is manifested by the authors quite differently in The Quiet Light, Man’s Search for Meaning, and Skyfaring. In The Quiet
Light, the Kairos is one of many similar moments, but the most important. In Man’s Search for Meaning, the Kairos only
applies to a little more than half the book, but there is only one, not many. In Skyfaring the closest thing to a Kairos is
short and not even that important to the general theme of the book. These are just a few of the many ways Kairos is
manifested.

White Lily Clan
The Wheel of Fortune
The wheel of fortune spins ‘round us all,
And when we think we have it all,
It quickly turns and down we fall,
Straight to Earth’s dark sadness hall.
I thought that I was better than most,
I thought I did not need to boast,
For them to give me a great toast,
For doing less than most.
I did not listen to my friends,
They saw my faults all through a lens,
They said; “You’re following these trends,
From which you must be cleansed.”
I rose too fast, I flew so high,
I did not see the end was nigh.
And no matter how hard I tried,
I just could not get by.
And since the rise was thus prolonged,
The coming fall was triple pronged.
My threefold faults for which I longed
Were smitten, no more wrong.
But as the Undulation law
States my steep path I quickly draw,
Leading straight up into the maw,
To repeat my three flaws.
So mistake not my rise for good,
For as sine and minus sine should,
As rise our Earthly fortunes could,
So fall our morals would.
But wisdom I have earned from past
Attempts to climb Mount Everest,
And wit I have attained at last,
But not enough to last.
Now with this wit and wisdom true,
The next fall will not be so blue,
Unless I use these thoughts in lieu
Of turning ‘way from You.
The wheel of fortune spins round us all,
And when we think we have it all,
It quickly turns and down we fall,
Straight to Earth’s dark sadness hall.

Babendreier
Islam is a religion of violence. Muslims of ISIS, a terror group of radical Islam, are persecuting Christians and Jews in the
middle east. Many terrorists are muslim and believe that what they do is good and just. 9/11 is a date engraved in the memory
of all Americans. Most muslims say that Islam is a religion of peace, but they are incorrect. Indeed, much of Islam is
peaceful but the peaceful muslims interpret their religion and the Koran differently than the violent ones. Muslims following
ways of violence even have good support from the Koran to continue.
The Koran is the book believed by the Muslims to be inspired by Allah.  There are many places in the Koran that give support for
violence.  According to the Koran, “Slay them wherever ye find them,” and “fight and slay the pagans.”  These are commands
for Muslims to fight jihads, or holy wars, for Islam.  Therefore, ISIS has very legitimate claims to be doing the right thing
according to the Koran.  Most Muslims are not violent, though; far from it, they are very peaceful.  That Muslims are mostly
very peaceful does not mean that Islam is not a religion of violence.
Muslims in the Middle East are persecuting Christians and others every day.  Although most Muslims are very peaceful, some
Muslims take the Koran literally, and, because of the lack of a hierarchy in Islam, there is no agreed upon interpretation of
the Koran.  There have been religious conflicts between different religions in the past, but only Islam can claim that
according to the Koran violence is completely fine and even encouraged.  Many terrorist groups are Islamic because in the
Koran it says that if a Muslim dies for his faith or while killing infidels, he will go straight to heaven, no matter what
sins he has committed.
The history of Islam is also filled with violence.  The prophet that all Muslims look up to and try to imitate, Mohammed, ordered
the execution of hundreds of Jews in Mecca as soon as he took it by force.  Mohammed even encouraged his followers to go on
raids to support Islam and convince infidels to surrender to him.  After Muhammad died, new Muslim leaders went on violent
campaigns to try to conquer other lands for Islam.  Later in Islamic history, although some Muslim scholars made  important
advances in several subjects, the violence continued, as Muslims persecuted and conquered.  After the 16th century, Muslims
settled down and became a more peaceful people in general.  Today, though, violence in Islam and on behalf of Allah is
increasing, or at least has increased so far.
Islam is not a violent religion but a religion of violence.  There is much support in the Koran for violence throughout Islam,
and Muslims who engage in violence even believe they are doing the right thing.  Those violent Muslims have good support for
violence, as the Koran says: “...meet the unbelievers in hostile array…”  Although Christians, Jews, and others are being
persecuted every day by Muslims, that is just the dark side of Islam. The history of Islam is full of violence, and so is the
present.

In Canto of Dante’s Purgatorio, Virgil, Dante’s teather and guide, gives Dante another lecture on love. This lecture is
essentially a continuation of another lecture Virgil gave Dante in Canto, also concerning love. The whole lecture begins
just after Dante and Virgil leave the Third Terrace, but the lecture in Canto begins after a brief pause in
conversation.
After an awkward silence, Dante finally gathers the strength to speak, and he asks Virgil what love really is. Although Virgil
has already described love with some detail, he has not yet fully defined love. In response to Dante’s question,  Virgil
enters into a short lecture on what love is, and begins by asking Dante to direct his intellect, so that he be shown the
truth and not led to the incorrect conclusions by the ‘wise’ men on earth. Next, Virgil says that since the soul is made to
love, it is immediately drawn to anything that pleases. If the intellect then creates an image of the real object and the
soul “tends steadfastly” (Canto 18, line 25)  towards it, this is what love is. Virgil then says that this is greatly
contrasted by what the supposedly predominant teaching on Earth that all love is inherently praiseworthy. Dante is,
unfortunately, even more confused by this, and says that because of this, soul has no merit. Virgil responds by saying that
he has shown as much as possible with reason alone, and that the rest, which is only discoverable by faith, will be shown to
him by Beatrice. This lesson that Virgil teaches to Dante is an accurate description of love according to philosophy, and
serves as a way for Dante the author to teach the readers something about love which they may not have known before.

Ántonia’s views on love and marriage change based on experience and wisdom brought to her by Larry Donovan. As just one example
of how good can come from evil, Ántonia’s experience with Larry is a mixed blessing. Ántonia’s time with Larry teaches her a
valuable lesson that she will never forget.  Antonia learns that she should make sure that her husband is a good and honorable
man.
After living at the town as a “hired girl” for some time,  Antonia falls in love with a man named Larry Donovan. They eventually
leave to get married, but  Antonia returns to her hometown with no ring and no husband. Later people discovered that Larry had
abandoned her and left town. Soon after Larry leaves  Antonia, she finds that she is pregnant, and gives birth to a beautiful
baby girl. Ántonia’s daughter brings her enough joy to counteract the sadness brought by Larry, and for the first time in a
long while, she is happy.  Antonia loved her baby girl “[A]s dearly as if she’d had a ring on her finger…” (Page 94, Paragraph
9). Later  Antonia gets married, and this time, due to the valuable lesson learned from her experience with Larry, she does it
right.  Antonia realizes that there is more to marriage than just frivolous “love.” She marries a fine young man who loves
her, works hard, and remains faithful to her for the rest of his life.
Although Ántonia’s affair with Larry Donovan is evil and  wrong, she gets a lot of good out of it. One of the goods  Antonia earns
from her experience with Larry is the lesson she learned from it. She learned that there is more to a good marriage than just
love, and that she should marry a good person. Another good that came from Larry is Ántonia’s baby. Although  Antonia and
Larry never got married, when  Antonia came home she soon found that she was pregnant.  Antonia soon gave birth to a beautiful
baby girl, whom she loved very dearly. Yet another good that came from Ántonia’s experience with Larry is that she can teach
her children the valuable lesson that she learned. That way they will never have to be in the same situation, they will have
learned from their mother’s mistake, especially Martha.
Throughout My  Antonia, Ántonia’s views on love and marriage remain constant, except that they change drastically after her
experience with Larry. Before  Antonia was abandoned by Larry, she thought that marriage was all about romantic love.  Antonia
thought that it does not matter who you marry, as long as you love him.  Antonia made a mistake in thinking this, and she paid
dearly for her mistake. She was left alone and abandoned by her “love,” and she had to work for months on a farm while
pregnant. Then she realized that “love” is not all there is to marriage, that she should have made sure that whoever she
marries is honorable and productive, and actually loves her.  Antonia learned a lesson, but that did not stop her from making
the most of the rest of her life.  Antonia found a man who did not care about her affair with Larry and who loved her just the
same. She married Anton Cuzak, who “had always been hunting for” a girl like  Antonia, and remained faithful to her for the
rest of his life (Page 107, Paragraph 6).
Ántonia’s views on love and marriage change because of her experience with Larry Donovan. Although  Antonia experiences much pain
and suffering because of Larry, she also learns a valuable lesson: that one should always marry a good person. With that
lesson in hand,  Antonia marries a good man and begins to realize the goods that came from her affair with Larry. The first
good that came from Larry is the baby girl, but  Antonia also learned a valuable lesson from Larry. Finally, perhaps the most
important good that came from Ántonia’s experience with Larry is that she can teach her children the valuable lesson that she
learned, thereby preventing further disasters of the same kind.

The kairos in The Hot Zone, The Wreck of the Whaleship Essex, and Apollo 13 all lead to varying degrees of success. In The Hot
Zone, the kairos led to the success of the plan to stop the Ebola in Reston before it led to the deaths of people, but did
not stop the infection of a few of them. The kairos in The Wreck of the Whaleship essex leads to the survival of most of the
crew members on the Essex, but the deaths of many. The kairos in Apollo 13 leads to the survival of the entire crew, but the
failure of a NASA mission.
The kairos in Richard Preston’s The Hot Zone is when C. J. Peters finds out that the Reston monkeys have Ebola and decides that
the army must move fast to stop the coming outbreak before it begins. This important decision ultimately lead to the success
of C. J. Peter’s plan, which was zero human deaths. C. J. Peters first learned that there was Ebola in Reston when Tom
Geisbert looked at the monkey blood samples and saw what he thought was Marburg.  C. J. Peters said, “When will your tests be
done? Because if those monkeys have Marburg, we have to figure out what to do” (Page 205, Paragraph 5). That statement was
the buildup to the key decision: what to do about the Ebola. Eventually, C. J. Peters found out that the disease was Ebola
and contacted the CDC in Atlanta Georgia To alert them of the situation. They held a meeting at USAMRIID where they decided
that the army would take care of the monkeys and the CDC would take care of all human patients, if any. In the end their plan
worked, and the outbreak was stopped in its tracks. But, what they only found out later was that the disease was harmless to
humans but nearly 100% fatal to monkeys, and extremely contagious. If the disease, later named Ebola Reston, was able to
infect humans, its high mortality rate and contagious nature could have caused a world-wide outbreak resulting in millions of
deaths.
The kairos in Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger’s Apollo 13 occurred when the crew of the mission decided to abort the mission,
abandon the Command Module (CM), and enter the Lunar Module (LM) for the duration of the mission. The key decision came after
one of the oxygen tanks in the Service Module (SM) exploded, leaving them with a limited oxygen supply and damaged
spacecraft. After assessing the damage and attempting repairs, the commander, Jim Lovell, decided that repairs would be
futile and that to save the lives of his crew they must abort the mission, abandon the CM and stay in the LM. This key
decision led to the survival of the entire crew and the avoidance of NASA’s first major space disaster. Unfortunately, a side
effect of this key decision was that none of the crew members would get to land on the moon and the key priority of the
mission would not be realized.
The kairos in Owen Chase’s The Wreck of the Whaleship Essex happened when Owen Chase, the first mate, decided to leave the ship
after the whale started sinking her and get into the small spare boat while the captain was out after a whale. A few minutes
ago, the captain was out after a whale and Owen Chase was watching the the ship peacefully when a large sperm whale attacked
and badly stove the ship. At first the crew tried to bail water and save the ship, but the whale continued to attack and made
it worse every minute. The captain was out, he could not direct the crew, so that responsibility fell on Owen Chase, the
first mate. Owen Chase did not flinch from his task and when he realized that the ship was lost, he “...ordered the men to
cease pumping, and every one to provide for himself...cut away the lashings of the spare boat...to take her as she came down”
(Page 23, Lines 6-11). This decisive action by Owen Chase led to the survival of most of the crew, even though many
inevitably died.
In The Hot Zone, C. J. Peter’s leadership and steadfastness saved the lives of many of the workers at the Reston monkey house and
prevented an Ebola scare in Washington. In Apollo 13, the leadership of Jim Lovell and his presence of mind saved the lives
of his crew at the cost of his mission, a great sacrifice. In The Wreck of the Whaleship Essex, Owen Chase’s presence of mind
and quick thinking saved the lives of most of the crew even though the captain was not there, a difficult decision to make.
Presence of mind and leadership is a very important contributing factor to these books and more importantly to the true
stories that inspired them.

The kairos in Watership Down, Voyage to Alpha Centauri, and American Cicero all ultimately lead to success. In Watership Down,
the kairos leads to the success of Hazel’s plans and the success of Hazel’s warren. The kairos in Voyage to Alpha Centauri
leads to the success of God’s plan for Dr. Hoyos. It also leads to the conversion of many people. The kairos in American
Cicero leads to the success of Charles Carroll’s political career and, ultimately, to freedom of religion in America.
The kairos in Bradly Birzer’s American Cicero is Charles Carroll’s most decisive action. The kairos happens when Charles first
enters the debates with Dulany as “First Citizen.” Charles first entered the debate because Dulany was trying to defend his
statement that fees are not taxes. Charles decided that he had to write a reply, and this came in the form of entering the
debate with dulany. This decisive action launches Charles Carroll’s political career and ultimately leads to the success of
Charles’ main goals: independance from Great Britain the legalization of Catholicism in America. Charles Carroll was both a
brilliant writer and political thinker. His talents are first fully revealed in his public debates with Dulany, and ever
since then his words continued to have influence on the people. In his debates with Dulany, Charles draws upon authors such
as Horace and others to prove his points. Charles excellently defends his ideas and does not insult Dulany the way he
insulted Charles. Charles’ influence won by his letters eventually led to the freedom of religion in America, perhaps one of
the most important things Charles ever did.
The kairos in Watership Down by Richard Adams occurs when Bigwig decided to move out during the storm. Earlier in the book, Hazel
and Blackberry made a plan to steal some of the does from Efrafa. Bigwig played a leading role in the plan because it was his
job to actually go into Efrafa and bring out the does. The plan had gone relatively well until then, but on the way out
Bigwig was chased down be General Woundwort. There had been a large storm brewing nearby, and now it finally broke. Most
rabbits are afraid of storms, but Bigwig decided that he would just go along with the storm. With General Woundwort right in
front of him, Bigwig remained calm even when the lightning struck. He took advantage of the lightning to get away faster.
Then Kehaar attacked Woundwort, and Bigwig again took advantage of the confusion to get the does out. Bigwig’s decision to
use the storm to his advantage ultimately lead to the prosperity of Hazel’s warren. Bigwig had the chance to run away and
save himself at the cost of losing the does many times, but always he resisted and prevailed against Woundwort in the end.
The kairos in Voyage to Alpha Centauri by Michael O’Brien was when Manuel fixed the maneuvering systems for the Kosmos. Years
earlier, during a confrontation with the DSI, Dr. Hoyos had destroyed the controls for the Kosmos in a fit of rage and
despair. He also accidently killed the only priest on board, and was so depressed he almost killed himself. Everyone on board
tried everything they knew to get the ship to work, but nothing they tried would work. Then, when the Kosmos was nearing the
earth, Dr. Hoyos was despairing and ready to commit suicide. He knew they had no chance of surviving, and also blamed himself
for all the death and destruction that had happened on the voyage so far. Meanwhile, Manuel was praying calmly. Eventually,
Manuel’s praying rewarded him and God told him how to fix the ship, but only at the cost of his life. After Manuel had fixed
the ship, there was a mass conversion and even Dr. Hoyos became a believer.
In Watership Down, Bigwig’s presence of mind saved Hazel’s warren and the does of Efrafa. In times of confusion he remained calm
for the sake of others. In Voyage to Alpha Centauri, the faith of Manuel saved hundreds of lives and ended up converting many
others. Manuel’s sacrifice was nothing short of a miracle. In American Cicero, Charles Carroll’s brilliant writing skills
helped bring about the freedom of religion we know today. His brilliancy was known throughout the colonies and he used it
wisely to influence the  U. S. government forever. Presence of mind is the critical part of the kairos in all the books.

A Christmas Tale
The snow was white the stars were bright
When on that Christmas eve,
T’was born to all the world a light
For all our pains to ease.
The angels told the men anon
But to their great surprise,
The Lord was fast asleep upon
A manger full of hay.
