Love righteousness,[b] you who judge the earth;
    think of the Lord in goodness,
    and seek him in integrity of heart;
2 Because he is found by those who do not test him,
    and manifests himself to those who do not disbelieve him.
3 For perverse counsels separate people from God,
    and his power, put to the proof, rebukes the foolhardy;
4 [c]Because into a soul that plots evil wisdom does not enter,
    nor does she dwell in a body under debt of sin.
5 For the holy spirit of discipline[d] flees deceit
    and withdraws from senseless counsels
    and is rebuked when unrighteousness occurs.
6 For wisdom is a kindly spirit,
    yet she does not acquit blasphemous lips;
Because God is the witness of the inmost self
    and the sure observer of the heart
    and the listener to the tongue.
7 For the spirit of the Lord fills the world,
    is all-embracing, and knows whatever is said.
8 Therefore those who utter wicked things will not go unnoticed,
    nor will chastising condemnation pass them by.
9 For the devices of the wicked shall be scrutinized,
    and the sound of their words shall reach the Lord,
    for the chastisement of their transgressions;
10 Because a jealous ear hearkens to everything,
    and discordant grumblings are not secret.
11 Therefore guard against profitless grumbling,
    and from calumny[e] withhold your tongues;
For a stealthy utterance will not go unpunished,
    and a lying mouth destroys the soul.
12 Do not court death[f] by your erring way of life,
    nor draw to yourselves destruction by the works of your hands.
13 Because God did not make death,
    nor does he rejoice in the destruction of the living.
14 For he fashioned all things that they might have being,
    and the creatures of the world are wholesome;
There is not a destructive drug among them
    nor any domain of Hades[g] on earth,
15 For righteousness is undying.[h]
The Wicked Reject Immortality and Righteousness Alike

16 It was the wicked who with hands and words invited death,
    considered it a friend, and pined for it,
    and made a covenant with it,
Because they deserve to be allied with it.
Chapter 2

1     For, not thinking rightly, they said among themselves:[i]
“Brief and troubled is our lifetime;
    there is no remedy for our dying,
    nor is anyone known to have come back from Hades.
2 For by mere chance were we born,
    and hereafter we shall be as though we had not been;
Because the breath in our nostrils is smoke,
    and reason a spark from the beating of our hearts,
3 And when this is quenched, our body will be ashes
    and our spirit will be poured abroad like empty air.
4 Even our name will be forgotten in time,
    and no one will recall our deeds.
So our life will pass away like the traces of a cloud,
    and will be dispersed like a mist
Pursued by the sun’s rays
    and overpowered by its heat.
5 For our lifetime is the passing of a shadow;
    and our dying cannot be deferred
    because it is fixed with a seal; and no one returns.
6 Come, therefore, let us enjoy the good things that are here,
    and make use of creation with youthful zest.
7 Let us have our fill of costly wine and perfumes,
    and let no springtime blossom pass us by;
8     let us crown ourselves with rosebuds before they wither.
9 Let no meadow be free from our wantonness;
    everywhere let us leave tokens of our merriment,
    for this is our portion, and this our lot.
10 Let us oppress the righteous poor;
    let us neither spare the widow
    nor revere the aged for hair grown white with time.
11 But let our strength be our norm of righteousness;
    for weakness proves itself useless.
12 [j]Let us lie in wait for the righteous one, because he is annoying to us;
    he opposes our actions,
Reproaches us for transgressions of the law[k]
    and charges us with violations of our training.
13 He professes to have knowledge of God
    and styles himself a child of the Lord.
14 To us he is the censure of our thoughts;
    merely to see him is a hardship for us,
15 Because his life is not like that of others,
    and different are his ways.
16 He judges us debased;
    he holds aloof from our paths as from things impure.
He calls blest the destiny of the righteous
    and boasts that God is his Father.
17 Let us see whether his words be true;
    let us find out what will happen to him in the end.
18 For if the righteous one is the son of God, God will help him
    and deliver him from the hand of his foes.
19 With violence and torture let us put him to the test
    that we may have proof of his gentleness
    and try his patience.
20 Let us condemn him to a shameful death;
    for according to his own words, God will take care of him.”
21 These were their thoughts, but they erred;
    for their wickedness blinded them,
22 [l]And they did not know the hidden counsels of God;
    neither did they count on a recompense for holiness
    nor discern the innocent souls’ reward.
23 For God formed us to be imperishable;
    the image of his own nature he made us.
24 But by the envy[m] of the devil, death entered the world,
    and they who are allied with him experience it.
Chapter 3

The Hidden Counsels of God[n]

A. On Suffering[o]

1 The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God,
    and no torment shall touch them.
2 They seemed, in the view of the foolish, to be dead;
    and their passing away was thought an affliction
3     and their going forth from us, utter destruction.
But they are in peace.
4 For if to others, indeed, they seem punished,
    yet is their hope full of immortality;
5 Chastised a little, they shall be greatly blessed,
    because God tried them
    and found them worthy of himself.
6 As gold in the furnace, he proved them,
    and as sacrificial offerings[p] he took them to himself.
7 In the time of their judgment[q] they shall shine
    and dart about as sparks through stubble;
8 They shall judge nations and rule over peoples,
    and the Lord shall be their King forever.
9 Those who trust in him shall understand truth,
    and the faithful shall abide with him in love:
Because grace and mercy are with his holy ones,
    and his care is with the elect.
10 But the wicked shall receive a punishment to match their thoughts,[r]
    since they neglected righteousness and forsook the Lord.
11 For those who despise wisdom and instruction are doomed.
Vain is their hope, fruitless their labors,
    and worthless their works.
12 Their wives are foolish and their children wicked,
    accursed their brood.
B. On Childlessness[s]

13 Yes, blessed is she who, childless and undefiled,
    never knew transgression of the marriage bed;
    for she shall bear fruit at the judgment of souls.[t]
14 So also the eunuch whose hand wrought no misdeed,
    who held no wicked thoughts against the Lord—
For he shall be given fidelity’s choice reward[u]
    and a more gratifying heritage in the Lord’s temple.
15 For the fruit of noble struggles is a glorious one;
    and unfailing is the root of understanding.[v]
16 But the children of adulterers[w] will remain without issue,
    and the progeny of an unlawful bed will disappear.
17 For should they attain long life, they will be held in no esteem,
    and dishonored will their old age be in the end;
18 Should they die abruptly, they will have no hope
    nor comfort in the day of scrutiny;
19     for dire is the end of the wicked generation.
Chapter 4

1 Better is childlessness with virtue;
    for immortal is the memory of virtue,
    acknowledged both by God and human beings.
2 When it is present people imitate it,
    and they long for it when it is gone;
Forever it marches crowned in triumph,
    victorious in unsullied deeds of valor.
3 But the numerous progeny of the wicked shall be of no avail;
    their spurious offshoots shall not strike deep root
    nor take firm hold.
4 For even though their branches flourish for a time,
    they are unsteady and shall be rocked by the wind
    and, by the violence of the winds, uprooted;
5 Their twigs shall be broken off untimely,
    their fruit useless, unripe for eating,
    fit for nothing.
6 For children born of lawless unions
    give evidence of the wickedness of their parents, when they are examined.
C. On Early Death[x]

7 But the righteous one, though he die early, shall be at rest.
8 For the age that is honorable comes not with the passing of time,
    nor can it be measured in terms of years.
9 Rather, understanding passes for gray hair,
    and an unsullied life is the attainment of old age.
10 [y]The one who pleased God was loved,
    living among sinners, was transported—
11 Snatched away, lest wickedness pervert his mind
    or deceit beguile his soul;
12 For the witchery of paltry things obscures what is right
    and the whirl of desire transforms the innocent mind.
13 Having become perfect in a short while,
    he reached the fullness of a long career;
14     for his soul was pleasing to the Lord,
    therefore he sped him out of the midst of wickedness.
But the people saw and did not understand,
    nor did they take that consideration into account.[z]
16 Yes, the righteous one who has died will condemn
    the sinful who live;
And youth, swiftly completed, will condemn
    the many years of the unrighteous who have grown old.
17 For they will see the death of the wise one
    and will not understand what the Lord intended,
    or why he kept him safe.
18 They will see, and hold him in contempt;
    but the Lord will laugh them to scorn.
19 And they shall afterward become dishonored corpses
    and an unceasing mockery among the dead.
For he shall strike them down speechless and prostrate
    and rock them to their foundations;
They shall be utterly laid waste
    and shall be in grief
    and their memory shall perish.
The Judgment of the Wicked

20 Fearful shall they come, at the counting up of their sins,
    and their lawless deeds shall convict them to their face.
Chapter 5

1 [aa]Then shall the righteous one with great assurance confront
    his oppressors who set at nought his labors.
2 Seeing this, the wicked shall be shaken with dreadful fear,
    and be amazed at the unexpected salvation.
3 They shall say among themselves, rueful
    and groaning through anguish of spirit:
“This is the one whom once we held as a laughingstock
    and as a type for mockery,
4     fools that we were!
His life we accounted madness,
    and death dishonored.
5 See how he is accounted among the heavenly beings;[ab]
    how his lot is with the holy ones!
6 We, then, have strayed from the way of truth,
    and the light of righteousness did not shine for us,
    and the sun did not rise for us.
7 We were entangled in the thorns of mischief and of ruin;
    we journeyed through trackless deserts,
    but the way of the Lord we never knew.
8 What did our pride avail us?
    What have wealth and its boastfulness afforded us?
9 All of them passed like a shadow
    and like a fleeting rumor;
10 Like a ship traversing the heaving water:
    when it has passed, no trace can be found,
    no path of its keel in the waves.
11 Or like a bird flying through the air;
    no evidence of its course is to be found—
But the fluid air, lashed by the beating of pinions,
    and cleft by the rushing force
Of speeding wings, is traversed;
    and afterward no mark of passage can be found in it.
12 Or as, when an arrow has been shot at a mark,
    the parted air straightway flows together again
    so that none discerns the way it went—
13 Even so, once born, we abruptly came to nought
    and held no sign of virtue to display,
    but were consumed in our wickedness.”
14 [ac]Yes, the hope of the wicked is like chaff borne by the wind,
    and like fine, storm-driven snow;
Like smoke scattered by the wind,
    and like the passing memory of the nomad camping for a single day.
15 But the righteous live forever,
    and in the Lord is their recompense,
    and the thought of them is with the Most High.
16 Therefore shall they receive the splendid crown,
    the beautiful diadem, from the hand of the Lord,
For he will shelter them with his right hand,
    and protect them with his arm.
17 He shall take his zeal for armor
    and arm creation to requite the enemy,
18 Shall put on righteousness for a breastplate,
    wear sure judgment for a helmet,
19 Shall take invincible holiness for a shield,
20     and sharpen his sudden anger for a sword.
The universe will war with him against the foolhardy;
21 Well-aimed bolts of lightning will go forth
    and from the clouds will leap to the mark as from a well-drawn bow;
22     and as from a sling, wrathful hailstones shall be hurled.
The waters of the sea will be enraged
    and flooding rivers will overwhelm them;
23 A mighty wind will confront them
    and winnow them like a tempest;
Thus lawlessness will lay waste the whole earth
    and evildoing overturn the thrones of the mighty.
Chapter 6

Exhortation to Seek Wisdom[ad]

1 Hear, therefore, kings, and understand;
    learn, you magistrates[ae] of the earth’s expanse!
2 Give ear, you who have power over multitudes
    and lord it over throngs of peoples!
3 Because authority was given you by the Lord
    and sovereignty by the Most High,
    who shall probe your works and scrutinize your counsels!
4 Because, though you were ministers of his kingdom, you did not judge rightly,
    and did not keep the law,[af]
    nor walk according to the will of God,
5 Terribly and swiftly he shall come against you,
    because severe judgment awaits the exalted—
6 For the lowly may be pardoned out of mercy
    but the mighty shall be mightily put to the test.
7 For the Ruler of all shows no partiality,
    nor does he fear greatness,
Because he himself made the great as well as the small,
    and provides for all alike;
8     but for those in power a rigorous scrutiny impends.
9 To you, therefore, O princes, are my words addressed
    that you may learn wisdom and that you may not fall away.
10 For those who keep the holy precepts hallowed will be found holy,
    and those learned in them will have ready a response.[ag]
11 Desire therefore my words;
    long for them and you will be instructed.
12 Resplendent and unfading is Wisdom,
    and she is readily perceived by those who love her,
    and found by those who seek her.
13 She hastens to make herself known to those who desire her;
14     one who watches for her at dawn will not be disappointed,
    for she will be found sitting at the gate.
15 For setting your heart on her is the perfection of prudence,
    and whoever keeps vigil for her is quickly free from care;
16 Because she makes her rounds, seeking those worthy of her,
    and graciously appears to them on the way,
    and goes to meet them with full attention.
17 [ah]For the first step toward Wisdom is an earnest desire for discipline;
18     then, care for discipline is love of her;
    love means the keeping of her laws;
To observe her laws is the basis for incorruptibility;
19     and incorruptibility makes one close to God;
20     thus the desire for Wisdom leads to a kingdom.
21 If, then, you find pleasure in throne and scepter, you princes of peoples,
    honor Wisdom, that you may reign as kings forever.
II. Praise of Wisdom by Solomon[ai]

Introduction

22 Now what wisdom is, and how she came to be I shall proclaim;
    and I shall conceal no secrets from you,
But from the very beginning I shall search out
    and bring to light knowledge of her;
    I shall not diverge from the truth.
23 Neither shall I admit consuming jealousy to my company,
    because that can have no fellowship with Wisdom.
24 A multitude of the wise is the safety of the world,
    and a prudent king, the stability of the people;
25     so take instruction from my words, to your profit.
